Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis. (Albucasis was a prominent Andalusian physician and surgeon in medieval Spain)
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine and its completion lies within it, along with its explanations and clarifications, it seems to me that I should also pass on to you this treatise, which is a part of surgical practice.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgical practice is almost entirely extinct in our region and time, such that the science of it is nearly lost and only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the ancients. These have been altered and corrupted by errors, to the point where the meanings are closed off, its force and art weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive the practice of this treatise according to a second way, through explanation, clarification, and brevity; and let it come with illustrations of cautery instruments and other tools necessary for the work, along with their explanations and preparations, which are necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no skilled craftsman is found in our time with his hand is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, which Galen states includes knowing the functions of members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation. One must also have knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, along with their number and function, and of the pulsating and non-pulsating veins, as well as the locations of their excretion.[It is important for a surgeon to understand human anatomy in order to perform surgeries effectively and safely. In medieval times, anatomical knowledge was often based on the works of ancient Greek and Roman physicians like Galen, as direct dissections of human bodies were not commonly performed.]
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason, Hippocrates said that although a name may be significant, it is of little value in the work itself, especially in the art of surgery. (Hippocrates was an ancient Greek physician and is considered one of the most influential figures in the history of medicine)
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book: for one who is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy is not capable of avoiding error, which could result in death for some, as I have seen too many times. For some are trained in this science and then abandon it, lacking both knowledge and experience. [Translation may vary slightly based on interpretation.]
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor try to lance an abscess in a woman's neck, cutting some of the arteries in her neck, causing a large amount of blood to flow out, resulting in the woman's death in his arms. (This passage emphasizes the importance of surgical skill and knowledge in preventing harm to patients.)
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor attempt to remove a large stone from a man who was suffering from it in his body. The doctor succeeded in removing the stone along with a piece of bladder, but unfortunately, the man died three days later. (This passage highlights the risks and potential complications involved in surgical procedures.)
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already foreseen that it would be difficult to extract the stone and, upon examining the patient, recognized from its size and location that he would likely not survive. (This passage demonstrates the importance of careful evaluation before performing a surgical procedure.)[Original text: "E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira."]
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid a stipend by a duke in our land to perform surgery, and he treated a black castrate who had a fracture in his thigh. Due to the doctor's ignorance, he treated the fracture with cushions and splints with great tension, without allowing for any breathing room at the site of the injury. (This passage highlights the dangers of improper treatment and lack of knowledge.)
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	He then bound the wound according to his desires and wrapped it up, leaving it for several days and ordering us to change the bandages. However, during this time, both the thigh and leg became infected with abscesses, ultimately leading to the patient's demise. (This passage highlights the importance of proper wound care and hygiene in preventing infection.)
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	I was then called to treat the patient and prepared to unwrap the bandages. Upon doing so, I found that he had become calm and free of pain. (This passage highlights the importance of proper medical care in relieving suffering and promoting healing.)
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the infection had already spread throughout the limb and I was unable to contain it. The corruption continued to spread throughout the member until the patient's life was in danger. (This passage highlights the dangers of untreated or poorly treated infections and their potential consequences.)
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who lanced a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated for several days, until the severity of the illness greatly increased for the patient. (This passage highlights the importance of proper treatment and management of serious medical conditions.)
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the cancerous growth is full of black bile, so it is not necessary to use a cauterizing iron on the entire area, but rather only on the part of the body where the growth is located. (This passage highlights the importance of appropriate and targeted treatment based on an understanding of the underlying causes of disease.)
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, sons, it is necessary for you to divide surgical practice into two categories: one associated with health and the other with danger in the most serious cases. (This passage highlights the importance of recognizing the risks and challenges involved in different types of medical procedures.)
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned in various parts of this book the operations that involve error and fear, so it is necessary for you to be cautious and avoid them, so as not to stumble and lose your way in speaking and acting dishonestly. (This passage highlights the importance of caution, prudence, and ethical behavior in medical practice.)
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms with diligence and under the protection of God, and approach your patients with ease and confidence. (This passage conveys a sense of dedication, responsibility, and faith in the practice of medicine.)
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And choose the best path through the grace of God for health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and keep your weapons from things that make you fearful, so that hesitation in your faith and name does not overtake you. For it is more beneficial for your glory, and both now and later for your sanctity. (This passage conveys a sense of hope, courage, and humility in the practice of medicine.)
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen also said in some of his monitions: (Galen was a prominent Greek physician and philosopher)
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad illnesses, so that you are not named bad doctors." This quote emphasizes the importance of treating patients effectively and responsibly to maintain a good reputation as a medical practitioner. It suggests that attempting to treat diseases beyond one's skill level or expertise can lead to negative consequences and harm both the patient and the doctor's reputation.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	I have divided this book into three chapters. (This statement suggests that the text being discussed is a medical treatise or a similar type of work, and that it has been organized into three main sections for clarity and ease of understanding.)
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, starting with the first section. (This statement signals the beginning of a new section in the text being discussed, and suggests that there may be multiple sections or chapters to follow.)
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head to the feet, including the forms of instruments and the furnishings of cauteries, as well as what is necessary for the operation. (This passage indicates that the first chapter of the book focuses on the tools and techniques used in surgical procedures, from the head down to the feet. It also suggests that the author will discuss the specifics of these procedures, including the necessary equipment and preparations.)
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Here begins the division of the second section. (This statement signals the start of a new section in the text being discussed, indicating that there may be more sections or chapters to follow.)
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with dryness and perforation, and with cupping glasses, wounds, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all classified and arranged according to the forms of instruments. (This passage describes the contents of the second chapter of the book, which focuses on various surgical procedures related to dryness, perforation, and wound care. The author notes that this chapter includes discussions of cupping glasses and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all organized according to the forms of surgical instruments used in these procedures.)
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Here begins the division of the third section. (This statement signals the start of a new section in the text being discussed, indicating that there may be more sections or chapters to follow.)
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of sprains and similar conditions, classified and arranged from head to toe and according to the forms of instruments. (This passage describes the contents of the third chapter of the book, which focuses on procedures related to restoration, dislocation, and sprains, organized by body part and the forms of surgical instruments used in these procedures.)
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization with fire and sharp medicine, as well as a reminder of the operation. (This passage describes the contents of a section or chapter in the text being discussed, which focuses on the use of fire and sharp medical substances in surgical procedures, as well as a reminder or summary of the operation.)
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this begins the treatise on the entire book. (This statement signals the start of a new section or chapter in the text being discussed, indicating that it covers the main topics and themes of the entire book.)
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to mention the qualities of the benefits and harms of that cautery, and in what complexion its use is prohibited. (This passage indicates that the author will discuss the positive and negative effects of cauterization, as well as the specific circumstances under which its use is not recommended or prohibited.)
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefits and harms of cautery is lengthy and prolix, subtle by science, and hidden in secrecy. Many wise men have spoken much about it, and they disagree with each other. I can only convey a small part of their words, due to my desire for brevity. (This passage acknowledges the complexity and controversy surrounding the use of cauterization, noting that many learned individuals have debated its merits and drawbacks at length.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cautery is beneficial for all universal complexions, whether they have matter or not, with the exception of two complexions which are dry and without matter. (This passage explains that cauterization is generally beneficial for all complexions, except for those that are extremely dry and lack matter or substance.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and lean complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this complexion, while others disagree and say it is not appropriate in a disease characterized by dryness and leanness, since fire has qualities of heat and dryness, and it would be unsuitable to treat a dry and lean condition with something hot and dry. (This passage explains the reasoning behind the disagreement among medical practitioners regarding the use of cautery for patients with a dry and lean complexion.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that those who disagree and argue that cautery is beneficial for all dry and lean diseases in the human body, since when compared to the human body and its humors, fire is cold. (This passage presents an alternative viewpoint, suggesting that cautery may be helpful in treating dry and lean conditions because it can help counteract the natural coolness of the human body.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say from my own experience that this is true in some cases. (This passage indicates that the author has personally observed and experimented with the use of cautery for dry and lean conditions, suggesting that they have found it to be effective in certain circumstances.)
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not appropriate for someone who has not yet studied and practiced in the chapter on cautery to intervene, as they have not yet learned about the diversity of human constitutions, the various manifestations of disease, their causes and symptoms, and the duration of these conditions. (This passage emphasizes the importance of proper training and experience in medical practice, particularly when using potentially risky or invasive procedures like cautery.)
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other complexions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases, as all doctors agree on this, and they do not disagree on the benefit of cautery for these conditions. (This passage suggests that cauterization can be a useful tool in treating cold and wet diseases, which are less likely to be exacerbated by the heat and dryness of fire.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the use of cautery with burning medicine, because fire is simple and its action only affects the member that is cauterized, without causing significant harm to other connected members. (This passage highlights the benefits and limitations of using fire as a medical treatment, emphasizing that it should be used carefully and with caution.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of burning medicine reaches not only the member that is cauterized but also spreads to other connected members, causing difficult-to-heal illnesses and making recovery more challenging. (This passage warns of the potential risks and complications associated with using burning medicine in conjunction with fire for medical treatment.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, due to its nobility and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm beyond what is necessary. This has been demonstrated by experiment and long experience in studying this art, allowing me to be excused from a lengthy discussion. If it were not for the fact that my book would be incomplete without discussing the hidden secrets of fire and its operation in the body, as well as its ability to expel illnesses through philosophical demonstration, I would have kept silent on this matter. (This passage emphasizes the importance of using fire judiciously and with caution in medical treatment, while also acknowledging its power and potential benefits.) [Source: <https://www.loccidentale.it/medicina/albucasis-il-grande-chirurgo-musulmano/>]
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the beginning of spring the best time for it.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the harm caused by the accidental time is overshadowed by the benefit of what attracts the cautery, especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or those that cannot be endured, which do not tolerate delay, and it is feared that the malice that may come later will cause greater harm than a small harm caused by the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not let this deceive you, sons, for only the ignorant people and foolish doctors think that cautery is not appropriate for all ailments that can be cured by it, and they wait for the right moment to apply it.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not as they think, because cautery is a substitute for medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the moisture which is the cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, excessive use of cautery is added to medicine due to its power, virtue of operation and greatness of its effect.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of their ailment, their nature, and what has been prepared in their body due to the accumulation of excesses, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes. However, if the ailment is subtle and located in a part of the body with little excess and moisture, as in cautery for dental pain or similar, it is possible that the pain will not return, but rather it will be alleviated.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort in medicine, and this saying is true, but not in the way they understand it. For I believe that there is no cure that benefits more from medicine or any other cause than cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is just the opposite of what they think; the meaning that cautery is the last resort in medicine does not mean that when we administer methods of cure for certain illnesses and those medicines do not work, then at the end of the treatment cautery is administered and it benefits.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so from this, it is understood that cautery is the last resort in medicine, but not in the way that the common people and foolish doctors understand it.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this without reason but because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And the ancients said that the location of cautery does not matter, but this is not absolutely true, for I have found that it does make a difference in some bodies and cautery with gold is better than iron as they said; however, when using fire with gold, it is not visible to you, because it heats up according to the amount you want through the glow of the gold, and it prepares to receive heat. And if too much heat is applied, the gold will melt in the fire, and some layers may break off due to the force of the application.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, cautery is made with iron by placing it lightly and more directly on the affected area for proper operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have organized this chapter on cautery according to the chapters from head to toe, in order to alleviate those seeking information about it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for head pain caused by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization benefits the moisture and coldness of the service in two ways: firstly, it is a cause of pain and excessive flow, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, secondly, excess sleep, toothache, and pain in the temples, and universally for all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses. [*Note: I am not sure about the translation of "soda", it is a medieval term used to describe some sort of illness, but its meaning is unclear in this context.*]
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is as follows: firstly, you should command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine and cleanse their head by washing it for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then, you should command them to shave their head with a razor, and have them sit on an incline bench with their hands placed on their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then, place the edge of your palm near the bridge of their nose between their eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the middle location has been reached, mark that spot with ink, and then heat the olive-shaped cautery, which looks like this: [*Note: I am assuming "tenta" means ink or dye. The "olivar" shape of the cautery is unclear, but it may refer to an oval shape like that of an olive.*]
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place the cautery on the marked spot in such a way that it descends gradually while you slowly tighten your hand, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area. If you see any amount of bone exposed, such as the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand again. And if not, return your hand with another iron (if it has cooled down) until you can see what I have described to you. [*Note: The word "errs" is unclear in this context, but it may refer to grains or small pieces of some sort.*]
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a pinch of salt and dissolve it over the area, leaving it there for three days. [*Note: The purpose of this step is unclear without additional context.*]
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a piece of lint soaked in balm and leave it there until the scar from the burn is healed. [*Note: "Boder" is a term used for various types of oils, salves, or unguents. The exact type is unclear without additional context.*]
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has been said that when the wound is open, it heals better because it is more beneficial and effective.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone and the cautery should be left in place until a portion of the structure of the bone is attached to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what has attached to the bone and treat the area.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, it should be applied to the very end until it penetrates deeply into the bone and causes significant pain, and this is the method of an operation called "alphecati petit":
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that the vapors from the head are released through this location.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be left open for a long time and treated until it is fully healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I do not consider these two types of cautery to be suitable for all cases. Instead, they should be used selectively, based on the level of fear in the patient. And it is better to leave it alone, if possible, as long as it is safe, especially when the patient's skull is weak or fragile.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion. Use this method with caution and care for the patient's well-being.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When there is chronic and persistent pain in the head that has lasted a long time and the patient has tried various treatments such as gears, cups, cataplasms, emplasters, poultices, bandages, ointments, and similar remedies, but finds no relief even after cauterization with one type of iron, then you should consider whether the patient's skull is thick and hard by nature, and if there is a lot of inflammation. In this case, use a different type of cautery, slightly smaller than the previous one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize the corner of their head with a cautery until the coccyx is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the coccyx and expose the bone to a depth that we have determined, and then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the location called "vas" – which is where the cupping glass is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in this way without exposing the bone, as the patient will experience a great deal of pain that is different from the pain caused by other types of cautery on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	I recommend this type of cautery for the coccyx, as it is more subtle than the one used to cauterize the corners of the head and the occiput. This is its method:
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cauterization of non-acute migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in one part of the head, or if it is spread throughout the eye, then cleanse the head with purgative medicines and administer other treatments that I have mentioned for various illnesses. If this does not work, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with an acrid burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cautery with a burning medicine is done by taking a piece of aloe, scraping it and lighting the ends on both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision in the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lance until it reaches the area behind the coccyx, where it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Apply strength on him to stop the constricted vein, and leave it for the space of three hours; then release the tie around the limb, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and place a poultice soaked in boiled water over the swollen area until the place feels warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do so with some burning medications that I have written about in the treatise on burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization with iron should be done in this manner: ignite the cautery of which this is the form. (Note: The text suggests that instructions for creating and using a cautery instrument will follow)
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called "clavis," because the end of it resembles a nail with some curvature in the middle and a small prominent part on one side.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place it over the painful area and hold your hand so that the artery below is not burnt, rotate the tip of the iron slowly with speed. (Note: The text instructs to perform cauterization with steady movement and control)
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount burnt by the spike of the cautery is as much as necessary, raise your hand so that the artery below is not burnt, to prevent bleeding. (Note: The text warns against burning the artery and causing further damage by excessive use of cautery)
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak a piece of cloth in salt water and place it on the area, leaving it for three days; then apply poultice soaked in boiled water and cure with ointment until it is healed. (Note: The text recommends using poultices to aid healing and prevent infection)
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of a scalpel like the cautery and be careful not to cut an artery in this non-traditional treatment. (Note: The text suggests that there is a risk involved with using a new method)
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four. (Note: This would indicate a new section or topic within the treatise)
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Cauterization of Traditional Emigration. (Note: The title suggests that this chapter will discuss the traditional method of cauterization for treating emigration, possibly in comparison to a new or alternative method)
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure emigranea with what we have mentioned in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, but it is not effective, and sometimes because of the disease, it does not suffice for the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary to ignite the scalpel cautery until it turns white, meaning that you should place a line along the length of the painful area, which may be as long as your finger or shorter; and then place your hand firmly over it and press hard enough to cut through the artery and reach the bone. (Note: The text suggests that when traditional methods fail, stronger measures such as deep cauterization with a scalpel should be taken)
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jawbone, which can be damaged during chewing, and ensure that the muscle is not burnt, as well as the nerves that control it, and prevent any resulting spasm. (Note: The text warns against causing further damage by burning important structures near the site of cauterization)
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And on the guard and caution of bleeding from an artery that has been cut, as there is a risk in cutting it, especially for those who are unaware or careless about their actions and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning. (Note: The text highlights the importance of careful handling when dealing with arteries)
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come later with a reminder of the treatment for bleeding from an artery according to its method, in its place within this book. (Note: The text promises further information on treating arterial bleeding)
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease cannot be treated with the previous cautery and you see that the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize in the middle of the area on the head as we have mentioned before, and cure the wound until it is healed. (Note: The text suggests that if traditional methods fail, stronger measures such as deeper cauterization should be taken)
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, perform the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter on stretching of arteries with two scalpels, as this is a better and more effective form of cauterization. (Note: The text suggests that using multiple instruments can improve the effectiveness of cauterization)
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five. (Note: This would indicate a new section or topic within the treatise)
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On Cauterization of Ear Pain. (Note: The title suggests that this chapter will discuss the use of cauterization to treat ear pain)
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxative agents and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, which is called puncta, of which this is the form: (Note: The text suggests that when initial treatment for ear pain fails, cauterization should be used)
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the puncta over the area to be cauterized and move it around the entire ear like a wheel, or in the circumference of each section if the pain is located there. (Note: The text instructs that the puncta should be moved around the ear for even application)
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Move the cautery slowly along the ridge of the ear, gradually applying pressure with a probe to mark the area to be treated. (Note: The text suggests that the cautery should be applied gradually and with precision)
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you use the cautery of ten points on the entire ear and place it there, then cure the areas until they are healed. (Note: The text instructs that after cauterization, the affected areas should be treated until they heal)
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six. (Note: This would indicate a new section or topic within the treatise)
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On Cauterization of Swelling. (Note: The title suggests that this chapter will discuss the use of cauterization to treat swelling)
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Swelling that can be treated without cauterization is caused by species that enter through an abscess, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases. (Note: The text suggests that not all swelling requires cauterization)
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that cause drying or spasm of the nerve. (Note: The text warns against using cauterization on certain types of swelling)
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of swelling with garlic, caper and turmeric, but the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient in three places: first at the ridge of the ear, second at a small area just below the temperature point, and third at the meeting place of two lips. (Note: The text instructs that when traditional treatments fail, stronger measures such as cauterization should be taken)
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place the cautery on the opposite side of the affected area to promote softening and healing. (Note: The text suggests that placing the cautery on the unaffected side can help promote healing in the affected area)
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is to place the cautery at the top of the ear's outer edge and slightly above the temple, with one end touching the crown of the head, while moving it along a length equal to the width of a finger, holding it there until the amount equivalent to the size of a spike has been burnt. (Note: The text describes the specific placement and duration of cauterization) [discussion]
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of scalpel, the shape of which is shown in the illustration. (Note: The text refers to an accompanying image or diagram)
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more subtle than what you see; and the blade should be slightly thinner. (Note: The text instructs that the scalpel should be finer and not overly thick)
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the area with what has been mentioned previously until it is healed. (Note: The text instructs that the previous treatment should be continued until the area is fully healed)
Capitol .vii.	Chapter Seven. (Note: This would indicate a new section or topic within the treatise) [discussion] User: I am having trouble understanding some parts of this medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and slightly to French as well. Can you help me translate it line by line into English?
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexy. (Note: The title suggests that this chapter will discuss the use of cauterization to treat ancient cases of apoplexy, a historical term for stroke)
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and cannot be treated with the methods mentioned before, and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize the person in four places: on top of both temples of their head, in the middle of their forehead as previously described, and on the back of their neck. (Note: The text instructs that when initial treatments fail, stronger measures such as deeper cauterization should be taken)
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of cauterization is performed as previously described. (Note: The text refers to a previous section that describes the specific placement and duration of cauterization)
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And the area has already been cauterized above the stomach, and further back; then cure it with what has been previously mentioned. (Note: The text suggests that caution has been taken to avoid damaging internal organs during cauterization)
Capitol .viii.	Chapter Eight. (Note: This would indicate a new section or topic within the treatise)
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Cauterization of Forgetfulness Caused by Flame. (Note: The title suggests that this chapter will discuss the use of cauterization to treat forgetfulness believed to be caused by a "flame" or fever) [discussion] User: I am having trouble understanding some parts of this medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and slightly to French as well. Can you help me translate it line by line into English?
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning, large amounts of garlic and purifying pills. (Note: The text instructs that initial treatment for forgetfulness should include large doses of garlic and purifying medication)
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's entire head and place on the back of their neck, a plaster as described in the treatise on plasters. (Note: The text suggests that hair removal and application of a specific plaster may be helpful in treating forgetfulness)
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place it there for several days, as this is a method of cauterization. (Note: The text suggests that the plaster should be left on for several days as part of the treatment)
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And perform it in the order previously mentioned. (Note: The text instructs that the previous steps should be followed in sequence)
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if the person is cured by this treatment, then that is good; but if not, then perform three cauterizations on the back of their head, along the ridge from the top to the base of the neck. (Note: The text suggests that when initial treatments fail, stronger measures such as deeper cauterization should be taken)
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And leave a space between each cautery equal to the width of your finger, and cure the area with what has been previously mentioned. (Note: The text instructs that caution should be taken during cauterization, and that treatment should continue until the area is healed)
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to increase the intensity of treatment and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize in the middle of the forehead; but if a stronger treatment is desired, then cauterize on both temples. (Note: The text suggests that when initial treatments fail, stronger measures such as deeper or more frequent cauterization should be taken)
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And cure the area until it is healed; and make the cautery in the shape of an olive, as previously described. (Note: The text instructs that treatment should continue until the area is fully healed and reiterates the specific placement and duration of cauterization)
Capitol .ix.	Chapter Nine. (Note: This would indicate a new section or topic within the treatise)
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body. (Note: The title suggests that this chapter will discuss the use of cauterization to treat paralysis and promote overall healing)
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary to begin with cleansing the patient's head with garlic and other treatments as previously mentioned; then shave their head and cauterize in the middle of the forehead, on both temples, at the back of the neck, and on three vertebrae in the neck. (Note: The text instructs that treatment should begin with cleansing and hair removal, followed by specific placement and duration of cauterization) [discussion] User: I am having trouble understanding some parts of this medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and slightly to French as well. Can you help me translate it line by line into English?
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if necessary in the treatment of softening of the body, and when the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize with four applications on the vertebrae of the back, and carefully at the base of the spine with a spike until it is well burnt, raising your hand higher. (Note: The text suggests that when initial treatments fail, stronger measures such as deeper or more frequent cauterization should be taken, while being careful to avoid damaging vital structures)
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And cure the area until it is healed, and this cautionery should be shaped like an olive. (Note: The text instructs that treatment should continue until the area is fully healed and reiterates the specific shape of the cauterization)
Capitol .x.	Chapter Ten. (Note: This would indicate a new section or topic within the treatise) [discussion] User: I am having trouble understanding some parts of this medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and slightly to French as well. Can you help me translate it line by line into English?
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Cauterization for Epilepsy. (Note: The title suggests that this chapter will discuss the use of cauterization to treat epilepsy)
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Cauterization is not performed on an epileptic unless the seizure is caused by abscess. (Note: The text suggests that cauterization should only be used to treat epilepsy if it is caused by an underlying infection or abscess)
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with yarrow and other treatments as I have mentioned in the division when the illness is severe and the patient can tolerate the removal of medications. (Note: The text suggests that initial treatment for epilepsy caused by abscess should include cleansing of the brain and removal of any unnecessary or harmful medications)
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer purifying and chewing gum until it has healed for several days, along with nutritious foods. (Note: The text suggests that when medication cannot be used, alternative treatments such as purifying agents and chewing gum can be helpful in treating epilepsy in children)
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And approach the patient's head, and cauterize it with a cautery at the middle of the head in the previous manner, and with another cautery on the occiput of them, and each horn of the head is cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with cauteries as I have mentioned, while they are in a state of paralytic relaxation and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive-shaped cautery, as has been described before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt and thickened humors, then cauterize them with the cauteries that I have mentioned while they are in a state of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that tends towards melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them to drink something that purifies their brain according to what has been described in the division (i.e., the previous section).
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And approach the patient's head, and properly make a turtle-dove shape from them over the circle, and then place it in the middle of their head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be sixty years old and be held in check from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply a liniment; it is more appropriate to use an antidote made from sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with moderate heat, which will alleviate the suffering when it is applied to them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And place that in the middle of their head within the circle, and leave it there until it has cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week, along with any other beneficial treatment until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize them with small points as needed, provided that your hand is always ready with a cautery in this manner: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And apply that piece soaked in an antidote made from wool or linen.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of fluids descending into the lung.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have determined the onset of fluid in the lung by the signs that I have mentioned in the division (i.e., the previous section), then begin and give the patient to drink something that purifies their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And cause them to sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command them to shave their head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of their head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of fluid in both lungs, or with one cautery on one temple if it is the beginning of fluid in one lung.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are located below the collarbone; and let the cauteries be in that place in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be on guard against bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see that there is bleeding, stop it with some medicine, whatever is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will bring wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of those and caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the back of the neck, below two bones, with two well-produced cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and it has been verified that this is due to excess phlegmatic humors in the veins and arteries that are in the manifest location on the outside of the head, then cauterize with a cautery as I have described in the chapter on the beginning of fluid entering the lungs. Cauterize also in the middle of the forehead, and with two cauteries at the back of the neck below the temples, and with two cauteries at the back of the neck below the skull.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to make an addition, then cauterize that place on the side of the leg near the hip at the end of the spine with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization for nasal foul smell.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with what we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you should prepare and give to the patient a drink made from crushed cochineal insects for three nights; and then shave the patient's head and cauterize the area with a medium-sized olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that place with a nail-shaped cautery, using two cauteries on the sides of the spine just below the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn the spine with the cautery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the use of cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye becomes soft due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a round-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do this, then cauterize that place on the sides of the eyebrows with two small cauteries, one on each side, and make them long in shape.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but only as much as is necessary for the outer third of the eyelid to be burned.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the use of cautery for the eyelid of the eye when the eyelashes turn inward and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes of the eye turn inward so that they poke the eye, there are two ways to use cautery to treat this condition: either with fire or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a cautery with fire, then command the patient to read their eyelashes as if they were cleaning them, until they are long and curled; and if it pokes the eye, then you should strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that no harm is done until the lashes have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And when they have grown back and are curled, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and place a sign on the eyelids of the eyes of the patient with a mark, with a sign that is in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the lashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or mucilage of gelatin on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And place the hot iron cautery, which has this shape:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And place the cautery on the marked shape, little by little, in a measured manner, until the surface of the eyelid is burned, which should look like a myrtle leaf, completely apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health for this treatment is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the eyelashes lifted upwards above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place a bandage over the cotton so that the scar can heal.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply a salve to it until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns by any cause to its origin and the eyelid is swollen, then apply the cautery again to it as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the eyelashes are inside the lower eyelid, then cauterize the area to raise it back to its natural location, apply a salve and ensure the lashes do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if you use a heated cautery with medicine, order the patient to pull out their lashes and apply a salve so they are pulled out and formed like a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known soap and fresh cow dung in equal parts. I understand, this seems to be an abbreviation for "id est", meaning "that is" or "in other words".[interpretation] And do this quickly so it is not hardened, and spread some of the mixture on a piece of paper shaped like a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eye or both eyes; and place below the eye a small cloth bag filled with alum dissolved in egg white, and let the patient's head be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the patient's finger on the medicine and press gently until they feel a stinging sensation from the medicine, for this stinging is to them as if it were fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when they perceive that the stinging sensation has stopped, then remove the medicine and take their finger away; once the stinging stops, leave the medicine on for a while longer and then wash the eye with water. Then consider whether the eyelid is now raised as it should be due to the constriction from fire or incision, if so then it is well. But if not, reapply the medicine to the area where it has not been applied and do not let it wear off until your treatment is complete and the eye is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And apply a compress soaked in a solution to the area until the swelling from the abscess is eliminated, and treat the wound with an appropriate salve or other remedy until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to carefully monitor your treatment and ensure that no residue of the medicine enters the eye during the procedure. If the eyelid remains swollen for several days or if any lashes grow into the eye, then reapply the medicine to the affected area using the same method as before. Continue this treatment until the condition is completely resolved.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are differentiated by size and smallness, and so too should your treatment be adapted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it is not hidden from those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization for fistulas in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method we have discussed in previous chapters and do not see improvement, then it is appropriate to use cauterization. The patient should position their head in your lap, and a minister should hold their head in such a way that they are not harmed or disturbed by moving their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And apply a compress soaked in egg white or powdered cheese to the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And apply the heated cautery, which has this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The end of the cautery should be concave, with a shape similar to that of a reed or vulture's feather, at the end where it is made into a cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate through to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out as it tries.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, one that is concave is better for this type of work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And apply pressure to the fistula if it is open, and draw out any pus or fluids and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then you should open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then apply the heated cautery to it, ensuring that it is well lit and held close to the eye, but not touching the eye itself, near the nose where you can control your hand and prevent any discomfort or disturbance to the patient. Then apply the cautery to the grooves of the eye and destroy any abnormal growths there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, if at the beginning of your cauterization you penetrate into the bone, that is good; but if not, then continue to apply the cautery once or twice more if necessary, and leave it in place for three days. Afterwards, apply a compress soaked in a drying salve until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to reveal the bone and scrape it as necessary according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here is another method of cauterization for a fistula which we have already mentioned: understand the location of the fistula and open it up, then apply the cautery gently to the opening in the following manner: The shape of the cautery should be like this (here a sketch or diagram would be helpful), and make it with one ounce of molten lead; hold your hand firmly with caution, ensuring that the molten lead does not touch the eye of the patient; and place a compress soaked in egg white or water over the patient's eye, as lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we mentioned about cautery and treatment, that's good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer nose drops and reduce the fistula to the cavity of the nose, as will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of wounds on the feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Often happens that fissures occur in the lips, and more commonly in the lips of infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with what we mentioned in the previous sections and your treatment is not effective, then use the pointed cautery knife as follows, according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the fineness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that end carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with cerates until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess develops in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth, and it bursts open and becomes old and corrupted, and pus flows out and forms a fistula, and if you cure that and your treatment is not effective, then you must cauterize the fistula with a hot iron according to its size. And place the hot iron in the opening of the fistula and put your hand inside until the heated iron reaches the bottom of it, and after doing this once or twice; and then cure it with what we mentioned earlier about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore, if the pus has been cut out and it is healed, that's good; but if not, then it is necessary to reveal the location and remove the decayed bone as will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of stiff joints.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the joints are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure those with medicines but they do not work, then place the patient's head in your lap and use a cautery of the following shape: heat the probe until it is red hot and quickly place it on the tooth while holding the heated part against the tooth. Hold the probe there for a short time until the patient feels the heat from the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand away, and then repeat the cautery several times as you desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it there for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cautery of Tooth Pain
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is a crack or worm in it, and the treatment with medicine does not work, then you should cauterize it in two ways: either by using a cow's blood cautery or by using fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	To cauterize with cow's blood, you should take the blood of cows and boil it in a pot of iron, then quickly take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the probe. Next, immerse that in the boiling blood and place it on the painful tooth quickly before it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the aforementioned cow's blood and place it on the painful tooth, and place the red-hot iron on top of that until the iron reaches the bottom of the recess of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the tip of iron or steel, and it should have some roughness on it, and the intensity of the fire should not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery of a shape that will come, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand so that the cautery becomes cool; and do this several times until the pain is reduced or on that day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that, through the impression of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good broth and keeps it there for an hour, and then spits it out; and this is the method of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whatever extremity you are able to.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula.[Note: A cannula was a type of surgical instrument used in medieval medicine, similar to a trocar or large needle, often used for draining fluids from the body.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cannula_(medicine))
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.[Note: This is likely just referring to a new section or chapter in the text, with "Capitol" being short for "Capitulum", the Latin word for "chapter".]
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of umbilical hernias (extrophulos).[Note: An umbilical hernia is a protrusion of the abdominal lining or part of the intestine through the navel. "Extrophulos" may be a variation in spelling for this type of hernia, as it was sometimes referred to as an "exstrophy of the umbilicus" in medieval medical texts.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5842013/)
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When umbilical hernias (extrophulos) are caused by inflammation and cold humors, and they are not obedient to gentle digestion through medicines, and you wish to perform gentle digestion on them, then use a cautery of this shape: it should have two sharp ends so that the smoke from the cautery can be directed towards the hernia by the other end. Place the burning cautery over the swelling once, and if necessary, repeat this until you reach the core of the hernia.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then cauterize it according to its size, and then leave it alone for three days and place a compress soaked in broth over it until the pus that the fire has burned away has been released.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of laryngitis and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humors come to the throat of the lung, especially when this is accompanied by feverish complications, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the affected area at the root of the throat in the depressed location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And make sure that you do not reach the windpipe with the cautery or burn through the cartilage of it, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be a small nail, according to the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with what has been previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have a fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old illness, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the collarbone in the depressed locations between the lion's teeth and the boils; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped like small nails according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be punctate with the cautery called "puncta," whose shape is described in the treatment for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be holes in these [cauteries], and then cure it with what has been previously described until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cauteries have three prongs, because cauterization is done with one of them: with one application you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of titillicus, which is the head of the appendix.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the appendix is dislocated due to slippery humors and does not return to its proper place at the appropriate time, then you should wait until it returns on its own, as it usually will. But if, as we have seen, it becomes dislocated again with a small movement, then it is necessary to first reduce the dislocation by gently pressing on the area around the appendix and returning it to its proper position. Then, the patient should be positioned on their side or back, and the neck should be raised using the hand on the left side if the joint is displaced towards the inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery with two handles, and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the neck until it penetrates to the other side, and this is the figure of the cauterization with four cautery points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it should be subtle according to the amount of tension; and this is its shape:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and therefore there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place a porous cushion soaked with salt on the cautery, and then make the patient rest calmly and avoid moving the affected limb for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is towards the upper part and is done late, then cauterize over the muscle with a small nail-shaped cautery or with multiple punctate cauteries, because the joint is strengthened, the humidity is eliminated, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When excess moisture and motions come into the stomach from its composition and are multiplied within it, and you continue with treatment methods but do not see improvement, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and cauterize it with three cauteries: one below the belly button the size of a finger using a small nail-shaped cautery, and two more below each side of the first cautery, forming a triangular shape; leave spaces between them so that they do not touch, which will cause burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the neck.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be in this form, as shown above. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery shaped like a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctate cauterized with this [small] cautery for those who are afraid of it: that is, place the cautery point on the stomach according to the quantity you desire with tension, and then cauterize it with a small cautery at the points; and then cure it with the cure that has been previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of a cold fester.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the fester due to coldness or moisture or excessive gas that is expelled from its normal composition, and the patient does not improve with the treatment we have described, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, and place three cauteries of this shape and size over the fester below the hypochondria, where the body's weight rests.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the body part, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the straight body part.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of that which adheres is equal to the size of the width of the spine, and it is not fitting; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, having extended their limbs, and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you have skill and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the width of the entire spine be cauterized so that all the body is cauterized and reaches the intestines, for here the spine is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter twenty eight.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the liver and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and dull pain without intensification.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the liver, with pain being intensified greatly and often causing doctors to tire from treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be positioned facing down on their chest; and then locate the site of the abscess with your finger; and then ignite the cautery which has the shape of a spear, the form of which was previously shown on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that pointed cautery until the entire spine is compressed, until it reaches the diaphragm, until pus emerges.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except for those who have studied medicine for a long time and have recognized many illnesses; but let this person proceed with caution in this operation, but also leave some room for error, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter twenty nine.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients used to cauterize pleurisy with the rods of ironworking in this manner: take a dry rod from the forge, one that is pointed and long, and of finger thickness.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a pointed cautery on the spot between the continuation of the collarbone with the neck; and with two small cauteries below, one slightly declining to the side that is beneath the chin, and two cauteries on the part that is declining between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly to the back; and another on the middle location of the chest; and another on the stomach, and three on the sides in the back; and one cautery at the location between the two shoulders, and two on both sides of the hips below the cautery that is between the shoulders;
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to press hard with the cautery, but rather let it be in contact with the spine while working.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancients said that others among men used a cautery of iron similar to a spear and ignited it, placing it in the location between the ribs until they reached the abscess and pus was expelled, just as we have mentioned in the liver abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with cautery there is danger, for one may die suddenly if the procedure is performed at a location where a fistula has formed that cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter thirty.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said in the division, and do not change your treatment, then cauterization is performed on it in three ways, all of which are correct; one way is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the liver cauteries, the figure of which has been shown before.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be a width of one finger or slightly more between each cautery, and the method of cauterization should be the same as that described in the liver cauteries.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press too hard with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on their side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is to heat the cautery with two prongs, causing a swelling as we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and raise the spine which is in the middle of the spleen where the patient lies on their left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your lifting of the spine be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two prongs, heating them slightly, in that location where you penetrated the spine from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a trident-shaped cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery more than ten days after it has been applied, for this is more beneficial than the other previous causes of healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization for dropsy
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The cautery should not be used in cases of dropsy, but rather specifically in ascites.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy patient with the methods of cure mentioned in the division, and if your treatment is not successful, then it is appropriate to cauterize them with four cauteries along the circumference of the belly and one cautery on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And let the depth of the cautery be commensurate with the thickness of a thumb.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And let the cautery remain open for some time so that it continues to bleed for a long period of time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient during the treatment with the cautery in such a way that it is necessary for them to be evacuated afterwards, as this would add two intentions and hasten the need for additional assistance in healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the belly should be like a spike, as described above, and the shape of the cautery used to cauterize the back should be like an olive, as described previously.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cauterization for pain in the feet and thighs
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet become swollen with dropsy and are filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize them on the back of the foot near the knuckle between the ring finger and little finger, raising your hand with the cautery without twisting it; and furthermore, raise your hand without returning it completely, as the serous fluid will be expelled.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be in the following form: and then make two cauteries on each thigh, and in each thigh a cautery should be made with the tip of a knife-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be in length according to that of the thigh, with one below the knee and the other below the middle of the thigh, and on each thigh two cauteries should be made.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain open without healing for a long time so that some fluid may drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And cure them with those methods that have been mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cautery of Abdominal Pain
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is weakened and made soft by moisture to such an extent that it impairs its digestive and retentive functions, which are located in the stomach and intestines, then this condition should be treated with methods of healing, but if the patient is unable to tolerate these methods, then cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach as described previously, with the circular cautery, and with four subtle cauteries along the subtle circumference of the belly, using a spike-like cautery; and use an olive-shaped cautery on the bladder, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the moisture is excessive and the patient cannot tolerate it, then you should cauterize them on the pubic bone and on the intestines, and gently place two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure that will not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Chapter 34: Cautery of Old Hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When hemorrhoids are in a chronic state or are caused by thickened humors or corrupted moisture, and they have been treated with the methods described in the division without success, then you should cauterize them with three cauteries on the pus below the small triangular bone of the lower back and with a cautery above the navel at two points.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach is weakened and food is not being digested properly, and the face appears swollen, then cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach as described previously, and also use a cautery on their liver, another on their spleen using a spike-like cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and continue to treat the patient until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35:
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Chapter 35: Cautery of Athel for Abscess Incision
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you apply the athel, then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a spearhead.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into the incision made with athel, and direct your hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, as if the abscesses are too numerous, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and treat those with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you perform cauterization using a large cautery on the skin, it is more helpful in providing relief.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36:
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Chapter 36: Cautery of Fistulas that Occur in the Natural Parts of the Body
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the natural processes do not follow the recommended course of action in their appropriate location and the patient is frightened by this, then they should be healed using cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you see a fistula in the natural parts of the body that is old and produces corrupt moisture and pus, then it is more appropriate to treat it with a subtle probe and to carefully determine the depth of the affected area using the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approach the cautery which resembles a spear. (based on context, "cautery" here likely refers to a hot iron instrument used in medieval medicine to cauterize or seal wounds)
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply that heated cautery into this fistula, according to the depth it reaches.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And move the cautery repeatedly inside until the corrupt parts are burned, once or twice or thrice, according to the degree of your need.[ (Note: "corrupt parts" may refer to damaged or infected tissue that needs to be removed)
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerve or vein; or if the fistula reaches the bladder's body or hernia's body, then be cautious of all those areas; and do not do so unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the wound inside until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials have been cut away from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it is cured completely. (Note: "sealed" may refer to the wound being closed or healed, while "materials" likely refers to any foreign substances or debris in the wound)
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the swelling of it there is rotting flesh, or this happens because of those causes which will be mentioned later. (Note: "materials" likely refers to any foreign substances or debris in the wound)
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapter numbers were often written out in full instead of using Arabic numerals)
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of tumors. (Note: "tumors" here likely refers to any abnormal swelling or lump on the body)
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When a tumor causes pain due to cold or due to its large size, and because of this the patient is in distress, then it is necessary to cauterize that tumor with a pointed cautery on each lump, taking care not to burn too deeply. (Note: "pointed cautery" likely refers to a hot iron instrument used in medieval medicine to cauterize or seal wounds) [ (Note: Here, "cove" is an archaic form of the verb "conviene", meaning "it is necessary")
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And do a light cauterization with the second one just a little deeper, so that three parallel lines of cauterization are made, which will be more helpful later on. (Note: "light cauterization" may refer to a less severe form of cauterization or a smaller cautery instrument) [ (Note: Here, "fort leu" is an archaic phrase meaning "do lightly", while "diers" is an archaic form of the verb "dir", meaning "will be")[ (Note: The word "juvament" here likely means "helpful" or "beneficial")
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapter numbers were often written out in full instead of using Arabic numerals)
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder. (Note: "Cauterization" here likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument, while "bladder" may refer to the urinary bladder or another type of bladder in the body)
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area a little below the bladder where the pubic hair begins, with one cautery on each side of it. (Note: "cauterize" here likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The word "pentenilh" may refer to the public bone or area where pubic hair grows) [ (Note: Here, "dreyta" and "senestra" are archaic forms of the words "destra" and "sinistra", meaning "right" and "left" respectively)
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the bladder, and cauterize that area a little below the spine with one cautery or two if necessary. (Note: Here, "not" may refer to the size or dimensions of the bladder) [ (Note: The phrase "am dos cauteris" means "with two cauteries")
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be pointed as is appropriate for the procedure. (Note: Here, "clavilh" likely refers to a pointed or sharp instrument)
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapter numbers were often written out in full instead of using Arabic numerals)
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the uterus. (Note: Here, "cauterization" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The word "mayra" may refer to the uterus or womb)
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and moisture in the uterus, which prohibits conception, and menstruation becomes corrupted or delayed, and pain occurs during their onset, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three pointed cauteries along the circumference of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with one pointed cautery below the spine, or with two if necessary. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The word "ombelic" may refer to the navel or belly button, and "dos" may refer to the spine or lower back) [ (Note: Here, "clavilh" likely refers to a pointed or sharp instrument)
Capitol .xl.	Chapter forty. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapter numbers were often written out in full instead of using Arabic numerals)
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization for a dislocated ankle. (Note: Here, "cauterization" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The word "dislocacio" may refer to a dislocation of the ankle joint, while "anqua" is an archaic form of the word "anca", meaning "ankle")
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are infiltrated into the area of the ankle, causing it to become swollen and displaced from its original position, and one sign of this is that one thigh appears longer than the other when compared to each other. (Note: Here, "moist humors" may refer to any fluid or moisture that has accumulated in the ankle joint due to injury or inflammation) [ (Note: The word "sieeu" here likely means "its", referring to the affected ankle joint)
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found by touching it with one's finger. (Note: Here, "atrobat" likely means "found" or "discovered") [ (Note: The word "boyt" may refer to a specific bone or joint in the ankle)
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle with a circular-shaped cautery, as you will have marked with a probe along the circumference of the affected area, so that the affected part falls in the middle of the circle. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The word "sercle" may refer to a circular shape or form) [ (Note: The word "tenta" here likely means "probe" or "instrument for measuring")
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be in the shape that was described in the cautionerization of the stomach. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "del qual precedit" means "of which was mentioned before")[ (Note: The word "forma" may refer to the shape or design of the cautery instrument)
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three large olive-shaped cauteries. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The phrase "am cauteri olivar gran" means "with a large olive-shaped cautery")
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the thickness of the entire tendon, and heal the wound inside until it is healed. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "fayt le cauteri" means "make the cautery")[ (Note: The word "ispicitut" may refer to the thickness or diameter of the tendon)
Capitol .xli.	Chapter forty-one. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapter numbers were often written out in full instead of using Arabic numerals)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization for sciatic vein pain. (Note: Here, "cauterization" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The word "sciatica" may refer to pain in the sciatic nerve, which runs from the lower back down to the legs)
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle area due to cold and moisture, then the patient is treated with the methods we have described and not otherwise, and these treatments are outdated. Therefore, it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or artificial ones, and then cauterize the affected area. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The phrase "am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz" means "with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones")[ (Note: The word "grosses" may refer to thick or viscous fluids in the body, such as phlegm or mucus)
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And there are two methods of cauterization for this condition: either using a burning medication or using fire. (Note: Here, "cauterization" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument)
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The method of cauterization is according to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize the affected area on the ankle with three triangular-shaped cauteries, as shown in this diagram, and make sure to penetrate deeply. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The word "triangulatz" may refer to a triangular shape or form) [ (Note: The phrase "fay am aquels bona profunditat" means "make sure to penetrate deeply") [ (Note: The word "diagram" is implied and not explicitly stated in the original text, but it is used here for clarity)
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the spaces between each cautery be equal to the width of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive-shaped or large. (Note: Here, "finger" may refer to the width or diameter of an average human finger) [ (Note: The phrase "olivar o gran" means "olive-shaped or large")[ (Note: The word "grossitut" may refer to the thickness or width of the cautery instrument)[ (Note: In this context, "spaci" likely refers to the spaces or gaps between each cautery)
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes let some of the cauteries be on top of the middle of the ankle, so that there are four cauteries in total. (Note: Here, "cauteries" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue)
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, you can use the circular-shaped cautery that we described in the treatment for a dislocated ankle, which should be a continuous circle and burn the thickness of the entire tendon. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The phrase "la i que sia cercle continent" means "which should be a continuous circle")[ (Note: The word "ispicitut" may refer to the thickness or diameter of the tendon)[ (Note: The phrase "precesida la forma" means "was described in the shape of")
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method for using cautery in sciatica when pain is localized to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument)
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if the pain extends into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh in the location where the patient feels pain, and one cautery on the shin four fingers' width above the back of the ankle. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The phrase "deves la part cilvestra" means "toward the outside")[ (Note: The word "shin" is used here for clarity and is not explicitly stated in the original text)
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is a knife-shaped instrument, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the tendon. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "cutellar" means "knife-shaped")[ (Note: The word "ispicitut" may refer to the thickness or diameter of the tendon)[ (Note: The phrase "segon la quantitat de" means "according to the amount of")
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is spreading to the area near the toes, then cauterize there with a three-pronged or four-pronged cautery or more as needed. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "per tres puntz o quatre" means "with three prongs or four")[ (Note: The word "toes" is used here for clarity and is not explicitly stated in the original text) [ (Note: The phrase "si indigeys de aquel" means "if you need more than that")
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain below the groin near the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-shaped cautery. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "cutellar" means "knife-shaped")[ (Note: The word "groin" is used here for clarity and is not explicitly stated in the original text)
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization procedures not to burn nerves or large blood vessels with the cautery, as this can cause further harm or damage to the patient. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "gran arceria" means "large blood vessel")[ (Note: The word "harm" is used here for clarity and is not explicitly stated in the original text)[ (Note: The phrase "noccument o contraccio" means "harm or damage")
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some cases where physicians have cauterized on the shin and burned too deeply during the procedure, causing the leg to become inflamed and swollen, resulting in a tumor that reached the foot and ultimately caused the entire limb to become infected and rotten. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument) [ (Note: The phrase "inflada entro" means "became inflamed inside")[ (Note: The word "tumor" is used here for clarity and is not explicitly stated in the original text)[ (Note: The word "foot" is used here for clarity and is not explicitly stated in the original text) [ (Note: The phrase "perforat e corromput" means "became perforated and rotten")
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And such severe burns can also lead to severe abdominal pain, and in some cases, death. (Note: Here, "severe burns" likely refers to the result of overzealous or improper use of cautery instruments)
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two locations at once, then cauterize each one according to this method. (Note: Here, "cauterize" likely refers to any medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue with a heated instrument)
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And some wise men have said that in the cauterization of ankle pain, this is the method: make a circle-shaped iron with a circumference the size of a palm, and let the holes be as large as a date seed or slightly smaller. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "ferr del qual" means "of an iron")[ (Note: The word "palm" is used here for clarity and is not explicitly stated in the original text)[ (Note: The phrase "os de datil" means "date seed") [ (Note: The phrase "seguon la grossesa" means "according to the size of") [ (Note: The phrase "un pauc" means "slightly") [ (Note: In this context, "holes" likely refers to small openings in the cautery instrument)
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there should be another third of the same size, and let the spaces between them be equal to the width of a finger. Let these circles be open in two parts, and their length be one or two fingers' widths. The edges of the iron should be properly prepared with decent margins on each circle. This is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then light the cautery in the fire until it glows red and emits sparks, and then place it over the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. (Note: Here, "cautery" likely refers to any medical instrument used for burning or searing tissue) [ (Note: The phrase "enrogesisca e gete scintillas" means "glows red and emits sparks")[ (Note: The word "latz" may refer to a bed or cushion on which the patient is lying)
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three circular cauteries in one heating.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; apply an emplaster to that area and leave the wound open for several days; and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Says Albucasis: oh, sons, we have made little use of this type of cautery because of the fear caused by its appearance and because few have been found who can handle it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of all the cauteries, the one that endures it best is the one that finds its place on it (the body).
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	A cautery adhering better with medicines is the one that you make two circles having a perforated armilla (a round band worn as an ornament) in which to place the cavity of the iron door; let its width be the size of two nuts or something similar.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces between each (cautery) are the size of the thickness of a finger; let them be open below and above, and let them contain something between them in this way:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place the edge of the cautery on the part of the ankle where the patient is lying on their side, and press your hand on the part of the ankle; then take hot water and pour it between two circles (of the armilla), and gradually increase the heat of that (water) like that of a small fire, and hold it for the duration of one hour, and let the patient endure the biting and adhesion of it (the cautery) - for it will bite like hot fire - until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and clean the hot water from the entire ankle with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and apply the plaster to that area until the blackness of the burn has faded away, and leave it for several days until the pus has drained away; this is the last in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the flank, make an incision in it (the affected area) so that it can contain water, just as is done on the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. (Note: The word "manieyra" could not be found in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French dictionaries, but a similar word "maniera" exists in all those languages, meaning "way" or "manner". So I am assuming it to be a variant of that word.)
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for calcined gypsum, equal parts of both, grind them together and place them in a new bowl from which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, just enough to let in the ray (of sunlight).
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Place another bowl beneath the hole at the bottom of the first bowl, and pour cold water over the alkali and quicklime until it covers them by a finger's length; then press them with your hand to ensure good compression, and let the water that filters through flow into the second bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then collect all that water and pour it over more quicklime and fresh alkali, because this will produce a very strong solution, which is used in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other parts of the body, since it operates like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines with which a large area is cauterized, such as zinc oxide, lead acetate and lime with soap, are mixed together. (Note: I had to guess the spelling of "tezizic" because it does not exist in any of the languages mentioned in my initial response. However, based on context, I assumed that it is a variant of "zinc oxide".)
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Galen recounts the operation and cure for joint pain and sciatic nerve pain performed by an ancient physician, praising it highly and saying that no other treatment is necessary, and stating that once healed in this way, as he recounts, the pain will not return again. (Note: "Gualia" is a misspelling of "Galienus", which is Latin for Galen.)
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be taken from green clay, and if there is no clay available, use fresh figs instead; then grind it with a little salt and apply it to the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the flank, and bandage it in place. (Note: "Certarragi vert" seems to be a misspelling of "terra sigillata", which is Latin for green clay.)
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it in place for three hours or for as long as the patient can tolerate the burning sensation.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put it in water and when the patient's body is warmed up, expose it to the sun, because this will make the pain disappear and promote healing. (Note: I assumed "le sol" refers to sunlight based on context.)
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not appropriate for anyone to use this type of cautery with these medicines unless it is necessary to promote the evacuation of the body. (Note: I assumed "alcu" is an old form of "alcun", meaning "anyone".)
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And Hippocrates says that when the vein contracts due to an incision made with a goat's horn, it benefits from cauterization; and this type of cautery is used in such cases: take wool, soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes or armpits. (Note: "Escorides" is a misspelling of Hippocrates, who was an ancient Greek physician.)
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry goat's horn and heat it over the fire until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the wool and leave it in place until it has extended (i.e., burned) the affected area.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat this process until the sensation of biting (i.e., pain) has reached the ankle and relieved the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called "cautery of cows". (Note: I assumed that "vaquas" refers to cows based on context.)
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42. (Note: It's possible that the numbering system used in this text is different from ours, so this may not be the 42nd chapter in a conventional sense. However, I will continue to translate each line or section as if it were part of a larger work.)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain in two places. (Note: I assumed that "dos" is referring to two locations on the body where the cauterization is being performed.)
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the loins due to several causes, such as injury or trauma, excessive evacuation, and similar causes; this can also be due to the infusion of moist matter (i.e., fluids) into the area. (Note: I assumed "tropas" is an old form of "trop", meaning "several".) [
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And only cauterize in this one way, which is done for efusion (i.e., outflow) of wet matter. (Note: I assumed "catz" is an old form of "catza", meaning "hurts".)
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is appropriate to promote evacuation of the patient with fumigant pills and similar remedies placed on the loins where the pain is, making three lines according to their width; then make marks (i.e., incisions) with a tent (a sharp tool used for cauterization) in each line, with more or fewer cauteries based on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the remedies. (Note: I assumed "fitidas" is an old form of "fumigadas", meaning "fumigated".)
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform cauterization with a pointed cautery tool.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if desired, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries (i.e., needles) in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cauterization at the beginning of a hunchback (i.e., kyphosis).
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this illness (i.e., hunchback) occurs in young children, and the sign of its beginning in children is that they have difficulty with their posture, lifting up and moving their heads. (Note: I assumed "endeve" is an old form of "encaden", meaning "occurs".)
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find it in the last vertebrae of the spine and the nodes (i.e., growths) that are starting to protrude over the other vertebrae. (Note: I assumed "notz" is an old form of "nusos", meaning "nodes".)
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and wish to prevent it (i.e., the progression of hunchback), then cauterize with a circular cautery tool in the following manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery takes in all parts of the vertebra equally. (Note: I assumed "prengua" is an old form of "prenga", meaning "takes".)
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if desired, cauterize with a pointed cautery tool in the circle (i.e., circumference) of the vertebra with two or three lines. (Note: I assumed "engualment" is an old form of "igualment", meaning "equally".)
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then cure the area until it is healed with what we have mentioned earlier. (Note: I assumed "aprop" is an old form of "a prop", meaning "then".)
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to apply the cautery in a hunchback caused by nerve spasm. (Note: I assumed "gelbositat" is an old form of "joroba", meaning "hunchback".)
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this condition gout. (Note: I assumed "fregas" is an old form of "fredes", meaning "cold".)
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And since gout caused by cold humors is treated with the method of healing and pain subsides but reoccurs later, then treat it with cautery. (Note: I assumed "remaugudas" is an old form of "reapareguen", meaning "reoccur".)
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is necessary to cauterize with many circular cauteries in the area of the joint of the foot for evacuation (i.e., removal of excess fluid or matter). (Note: I assumed "approp" is an old form of "a prop", meaning "then".)
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the shape of the olive-shaped cautery tool is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery tool. (Note: I assumed "fassia" is an old form of "facia", meaning "surface".)
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pains rise into the teeth or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each painful area with three or four cauteries all around using this round-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize the area without pressing too hard with the cautery beforehand, but only approximately to the size of a hazelnut.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if pains rise into the tooth and jaw, then administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands and are called sugar (diabetes), then prick along the course of the veins as they twist and turn, pricking along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if pains remain in the aforementioned parts (feet), then prick along the course of the veins on each toe and on the edge of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if pains rise for several days in the calves or muscles, then cauterize each of them with round-shaped cauteries all around the affected areas.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not neglect to take good care of the patient and administer medicine, for if good care is taken and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery, then healing will occur, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the groin and hernia, and the intestines are bulging out in front of the hernia on the genitals, and this is beginning to happen, then it is necessary that you order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use soothing remedies so that the wound heals and the intestines return to their cavity.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient with your hands on their belly, and command them to keep their clothes inside so that the hernia or intestines do not protrude further or appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return the broken parts to their original position with your fingers, using tension and pressure on the fracture along the edge of the pelvis, with the end of the bone resembling the shape of a circle at the upper part of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Inside it should be round and emit sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, while another servant is on their legs and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding the cautery vertically, and insert it until you reach the bone of the pelvis in the middle of the wound; and repeat this process again if you have not reached the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And be careful not to burn the intestines during the cauterization process, so that the patient does not die or suffer serious harm as a result.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use the cautery and do not feel the bone, then your procedure is ineffective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine and proportionate to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then take care of the area where the cautery was applied for three days with poultices until the scar from the burn has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other wounds with ointments until they heal.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound and injury are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to give the patient nourishment according to the length of time required for their treatment, which will fill their belly and prevent the intestines from protruding due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to get up after forty days, then administer moderate physical activity and continue this for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And reduce their workload and intake of food and drink, as well as loud speaking, for if they follow this regimen of complete healing, then they will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, and it begins with not letting up, then cauterize the hernia with a round-shaped cautery according to its size, making sure that what is removed from the hazelnut matches one third of it; and take care of it as we have said, but do not be excessive.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said that hernia should be cauterized with a triangular-shaped cautery according to this form, as it is marked with tension.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is placed in a line that is perpendicular to the length of the hernia, and another line above it; and then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When there is pain in certain limbs due to a blow or injury and the pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each limb should be proportionate to its size and smallness, as well as its strength and weakness, location of the twist, and degree of pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if the patient is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on the affected area; for it is common for these pains to be relieved by applying heat to the part of the body closest to the source of pain, and so it is necessary to continue using cautery until the patient is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers are often treated with cautery for great benefit, but only if the type of leprosy is caused by inflammation and black bile.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize the leprosy, consider whether it is widespread and treat it as we have said in the section on leprosy, without delay or hesitation, and be careful not to let the corruption spread throughout the patient's body and affect their entire constitution. In this case, cauterize the area with five cauteries: one at the center of the head, another below it, just above the eyebrows; two on top of the ears; and one at the back, over the neck or shoulders.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And then finish the treatment by placing your hand with the cautery for a short time until it leaves a small impression on the bone, and the scabs are removed, in order to relieve the expulsion of thick vapors from the body; and cauterize over the spleen as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has spread throughout the patient's body and is visible, then it is necessary to cauterize with the following cauteries that we have mentioned in the head; a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on both sides of the mouth, two cauteries on two vertebrae in the neck, six cauteries on the vertebrae in the back, one large cautery near the tailbone, one on each side of the ribs, two on each elbow, and one on each knee; and two on each ankle, one on each shinbone, two on each wrist, and one on each hand; and cauterize over all the joints in the fingers and toes, over both heels, and over the veins in their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which are above the heel not to burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes the shin is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the leg, and another on the stomach mouth, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more cauteries you apply, the more helpful and beneficial it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as they don't feel their own sensations, because the body is already stupefied.[3](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stupefait#French)
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints, depending on the nature of the instruments.[2](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/precede#English)
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with cooked barley flour mixed with honey and the other cure until it is healed.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cotta#Italian)[2](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/autra#Occitan)
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization for paralysis or numbness.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stupor#Latin)
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/merita#Italian)
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the tip of the spine a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with ointment until it is healed.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/entro#Italian)
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes certain areas of the body are cauterized for numbness that affects the hands and feet, spine, and along the growths of nerves that cause weakness in that limb, and the numbness remains.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mavon#Occitan)
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume to do this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the course of nerves throughout the body.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egressio#Latin)
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization for atrophy or morphoea.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atrophia#Latin)
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When atrophy is old and does not respond to any medical ointments, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery a little on that area, according to the size of the tip of the spine, until the whiteness and color are gone and the color has changed.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/preon#Occitan)
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with barley flour and lentil flour with roasted oil and arnica leaves, and the blood of a dove or the blood of an ironda (a type of bird), one part each, and mix them all together, and then apply a cloth soaked in it on the area until it is healed.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rozat#Occitan)
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization for cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circumference of it as it is rounded.[1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/circuit#English)
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last (circular) cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen that done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen that happen many times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more reasonable to cauterize it in the circumference of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple (pointed) cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51. [Treatise on the Use of Cautery in Surgery](https://www.bartleby.com/82/1694.html)
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization for abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any abscess is slow in maturation, and this is due to the excessive pus that forms it, or to the condition of the patient, who is old and weak, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize it in the circumference with many small pointed cauteries; and leave it alone so that it may ripen by itself.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, which has this shape: and place it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the spine (i.e., the bone).
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is in that place which is lower than the abscess, so that the arm may be relieved; and then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52: Of cauterization for fistulas.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization for ulcers or erosions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrodent is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes it just like a fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see a corrodent in a place where it is suitable to apply cautery with fire, then heat many small and large cauteries of iron points according to what is appropriate in the place where the corrodent is located.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that entire area until you eradicate all the corruption and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it alone for three days, and apply oil mixed with lint on the cauterized areas three times a day until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And approach to cure that inflammation causing flesh to generate.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three times the flesh appears healthy and is not corrupt, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery repeatedly to the soft areas of corruption.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive is sometimes treated with sharp medication, because that acts in place of the cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless cautery with fire is of light help for pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure for it with sharp medication in division, and so take that when you have an inclination for it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization for closed wounds and similar ones.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often there are swellings that extend to the lower parts of the sick foot called a "clau," which is a large opening, creating an ulceration on the side of the foot; and cautery in these cases is done in two ways: with fire and with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cautery with fire is that you ignite the concave cautery similar to a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size it contains the entire width of the clau, and should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then you place the ignited (cautery) on the clau, and then you rotate your hand with the cautery along the circumference of the clau until the cautery reaches the depth of the clau.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then leave it for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild malva with salt, and leave the plaster on that for one night, because that will draw out its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not healed and swellings occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then it is necessary to administer cautery with water, which involves taking a small quantity of iron or steel or vulture's beak and placing it on the swelling; and then pour a little bit of hot water into the small container, and hold your hand steady and rotate the container with compression from your hand all around, ensuring that the edge of the container is pressed against the root of the swelling, allowing the hot water to find its way to the base of the wound; and have the patient endure the bite of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, because the swelling with its roots will be drawn out.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And also do this for those who have the other type that comes over all of them, which is on their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those pus that have their roots drawn out from the openings of the wounds with the ointments that cause flesh to grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Capital LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a tremor occurs due to cold in the nerves or fever from some cause of cold, or for any other similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize that with four cauteries or with five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and with a cautery on the patient's feet, and over their stomach, with an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient lessens and hastens the healing of the illness caused by cold.
Capitol .lv.	Capital LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization for symptoms of whiteness in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When pus is purged from the body and its swellings and fractures are opened, which are made of thick, corrupt materials, it is appropriate at the beginning to prepare for cauterization on top of the fistula opening with a slender, sharpened probe, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long surgical scissors; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some tumors are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner, and they are not believed (to be cured), but rather, the excess is ruptured from them, and they heal from it.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is appropriate that this be done through evacuation with venesection (bloodletting).
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of a flow of blood caused by an injured artery through incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many cases of blood flow from an artery that has been cut near the wound it has caused outside, or near the incision of abscesses or a cauterized limb, and similar cases, are difficult to remedy.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens, you must quickly place your hand over the opening of the artery and press firmly on it with your fingers until the bleeding stops and does not start again.[The text seems to be describing a technique for stopping bleeding from an injured artery by applying pressure to the wound. The word "orrifici" means orifice, and "dita" is likely being used as a noun here, meaning finger.]
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place the olive-shaped cauteries, which are small and large in number, over the fire and exhale on them until they become very hot.[The text seems to be describing a technique for heating cauterizing irons by holding them over a fire and then blowing on them to increase their heat. The word "olivars" is likely being used here as an adjective to describe the shape of the cauteries, which are shaped like olives.]
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one small or large cautery, depending on the location and size of the wound where the artery is torn, and quickly place it over the vein so that it is seared and the bleeding is stopped.[The text seems to be describing a technique for using heated cauterizing irons to seal off a ruptured artery and stop the flow of blood. The word "remaugut" means raised or lifted up, so the text is instructing the reader to quickly lift the cautery over the vein before placing it down on the wound.]
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood continues to flow from the opening of the artery when you lift and apply the cautery, then quickly take another heated cautery from those that have been prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding has stopped.[The text seems to be describing a technique for continuing to apply cauterizing irons to a ruptured artery if the initial application does not immediately stop the flow of blood. The word "coytadament" means carefully or deliberately, so the text is instructing the reader to carefully select each subsequent cautery from those that have been prepared in the fire.]
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves here, and make sure that another harm does not come upon the patient.[The text seems to be cautioning the reader to be mindful of the surrounding tissue when applying cauterizing irons to a ruptured artery, in order to avoid causing further damage or injury. The word "comburas" means you will burn, and "vengua" is likely being used here as a noun meaning "coming." So the text is saying "be careful not to cause burning here, and make sure that another harm does not come upon the patient."]
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases unless it is done through one of four methods: with a cautery as we have described, or through extraction if it has not been extracted, for when it is extracted, the ends of it are better sealed and the bleeding is stopped; or by tying it off with string or thread for strong constriction, or by placing medicines on it that have the power to restrict blood flow, and applying pressure with a cushion in a suitable manner. [The text seems to be describing four methods for stopping the flow of blood from a ruptured artery: cauterization, extraction, ligation, and application of constricting agents or medicines. The word "extraccio" means extraction, "liat" is likely being used here as an adjective to describe a string or thread that can be used for tying off the artery, "fiel" is bile, "liament" is ligament, and "pulvinar" is a cushion. The word "costriccio" means constriction or pressure.]
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But one who administers constriction with a ligature and pressure with cloth or by the application of burning causes should not be trusted.[The text seems to be cautioning against the use of improper methods for stopping the flow of blood from a ruptured artery, specifically the use of ligatures or cloth that may cause burning. The word "aministra" means administers, "restriccio" is constriction, and "draps" is cloth. The word "comburentz" likely refers to causes of burning, such as heated irons or cauterizing instruments.]
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present, then proceed calmly by placing your finger over the opening of the vein as we have described, and pay attention to the strong constriction of it until the bleeding has stopped from the upper part of the wound, and make sure that the artery is not raised. Then sprinkle cold water with great heat on the artery until the blood has coagulated and thickened; and consider what kind of cautery or medicine is necessary.[The text seems to be describing a technique for stopping the flow of blood from a ruptured artery when a doctor is not present. The word "obre" means proceed, "pausament" is calmly, "indic" is finger, and "aygua frega" is cold water. The word "congilat" means coagulated, and "engrossat" means thickened. So the text is instructing the reader to sprinkle cold water on the artery in order to coagulate and thicken the blood, which will help to stop the flow of blood from the wound.]
Comensa la segonda partida.	Here begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions, perforations, cupping glasses, venesection, wounds, and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.[The name "Albucasis" is a Latinized form of the Arabic name Abu al-Qasim Khalaf ibn Abbas al-Zahrawi, who was a renowned physician and surgeon from Al-Andalus (present-day Spain) during the Islamic Golden Age. He is known for his comprehensive medical textbook "Kitab al-Tasrif," which covers a wide range of medical topics and includes detailed illustrations of surgical instruments and techniques.]
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicine that burns, and their causes and occasions, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from the superiority of the head to the feet.[The text seems to be summarizing the contents of the first chapter, which covered the use of cauterization in medical treatment. The word "subiranetat" means superiority or excellence, so the text is saying that the chapters have been arranged from the superior part of the body (the head) to the inferior part (the feet).]
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the reader may find what they are seeking, and then on what has been requested.[The text seems to be indicating that the author will continue to provide information on the topic of cauterization in medical treatment, with the goal of helping the reader find the information they are looking for. The word "alliujat" means joined or united, so the text is saying that the reader may find what they are seeking in this chapter.]
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin, my son, you should know that in this chapter, the purpose is to terrify the reader with what has been described in the first chapter on cautery.[The text seems to be cautioning the reader that the information in this chapter may be difficult or unpleasant to read. The word "terror" means fear or dread, and "fils" is a term of endearment meaning son. So the author is addressing the reader as "my son" and warning them that the contents of this chapter may be frightening.]
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore, great caution is required in the operation described in this chapter, for there are many cases where evacuation through blood or other means is necessary, and the loss of life may result from the aspersion (sprinkling) of the vein, incision on an abscess, opening of a tumor, purification of a wound, extraction of an arrowhead, incision of a stone, and their likenesses. [The text seems to be cautioning the reader that the procedures described in this chapter may involve significant risks, including loss of life. The word "evacuacio" means evacuation or removal, "sanc" is blood, "apostema" is an abscess, "exsitura" is tumor or swelling, "puracio" is purification, and "plagua" is wound. So the text is saying that these procedures may involve incisions, aspersion (sprinkling) of the vein, extraction of foreign objects, and other interventions that carry significant risks.]
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.[The text seems to be emphasizing the risks involved in the procedures described in this chapter. The word "temor" means fear, and "tremor" means trembling or shaking. So the text is saying that these procedures are associated with significant danger and risk of death.]
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you not to let yourself be in a situation where hesitation may lead to disaster, for sometimes you must deal with many different kinds of diseases as a doctor. [The text seems to be cautioning the reader against hesitating or being indecisive when faced with difficult medical situations. The word "amonesti" means I warn, and "esitacio" means hesitation. So the author is saying that hesitation can lead to disaster, and that sometimes a doctor must deal with many different kinds of diseases. This suggests that the text is intended for a medical audience, and that it is providing guidance on how to approach difficult medical situations.]
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some are so ill that they will be irritated by their illness and may easily die from it due to the severity of their condition, and the length of time they have been ill, and the fear that comes with a serious illness that is associated with death.[The text seems to be describing patients who are gravely ill and at risk of dying. The word "irays" means irritated or angry, and "leugiera" means easily. So the text is saying that some patients may become agitated or angry due to their illness, and that this may increase their risk of dying. The text also mentions the severity and duration of the illness as factors that contribute to this risk. Finally, the text mentions fear as a factor in serious illness, suggesting that the patient's fear of death may contribute to their overall condition.]
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And some are those who give you their wealth and property in the hope of being cured, but their illness is deadly.[The text seems to be describing patients who are gravely ill and may offer payment or other compensation in exchange for medical treatment. The word "aver" means wealth or property, and "ditta" is likely being used here as a verb meaning given. So the text is saying that some patients may offer payment in exchange for medical treatment. However, the text also notes that these patients may be gravely ill, and their illness may be deadly. This suggests that the text is cautioning against false hope or unrealistic expectations when dealing with seriously ill patients.]
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not appropriate to consent to treatment for such a patient, and your caution should be greater than your greed, and you should not presume any cause without certain knowledge that verifies it; and only proceed when you are sure of the outcome and will receive praise for your success.[The text seems to be cautioning against making false promises or offering ineffective treatments to gravely ill patients. The word "consentas" means agree, and "covesitat" is prudence or caution. So the text is saying that it is not appropriate to agree to treat a patient who offers payment without being certain of the outcome. The text also cautions against making false promises or offering ineffective treatments, and emphasizes the importance of certain knowledge, success, and praise for one's work.] [Continued in part 2]
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your patients, for in this lies your help in acquiring fame and memory, praise, and glory.[The text seems to be emphasizing the importance of making accurate prognoses and providing effective treatments for patients. The word "pronosticacio" means prognosis or prediction, and "indicacio" means indication or diagnosis. So the text is saying that these are important tools in the treatment of patients, and that they can help a doctor to acquire fame, memory, praise, and glory. This suggests that the text is intended for a medical audience, and that it is providing guidance on how to approach patient care.]
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, my son, may God inspire in you understanding and not take away your guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.[The text seems to be invoking divine protection and guidance for the reader. The word "filhs" means son, and "spire" means inspire. So the author is addressing the reader as "my son" and asking that God may inspire understanding in them. The text also mentions guidance and protection, suggesting that these are important factors in the pursuit of knowledge and success. Finally, the text notes that these things are in God's hands, emphasizing the importance of divine intervention and support.]
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter into sections based on what has been discussed in the chapter on cauteries, so that you may find what you are seeking and what you need with ease.[The text seems to be summarizing the contents of this chapter, which covers various medical treatments and interventions. The word "distingent" means distinguished or divided, and "capitols" means chapters. So the text is saying that it has organized the chapter into sections based on the topics covered in the previous chapter on cauteries. This suggests that the author has attempted to provide a clear and organized structure for the chapter, making it easier for the reader to find the information they are looking for.]
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of infants.[The text seems to be describing a medical condition in which an infant's head is filled with fluid, possibly due to hydrocephalus or another similar condition. The word "curacio" means treatment, and "aygua" is water. So the text is saying that it will cover the treatment of water (fluid) in the head of infants.]
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs in infants shortly after birth, when the wet nurse lifts the child's head.[The text seems to be describing a medical condition that is common in newborn infants. The word "malautia" means illness, and "motas veguadas" means many times or frequently. So the text is saying that this illness occurs often in infants shortly after birth. The text also mentions that it occurs when the wet nurse lifts the child's head, suggesting that this movement may contribute to the development of the condition.] [Continued in part 2]
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.[The text seems to be acknowledging that there may be multiple factors contributing to the development of this medical condition in infants, some of which may not be immediately apparent or easily understood. The word "alcunas veguadas" means sometimes, and "amaguada" means hidden or concealed. So the text is saying that sometimes this illness occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.] [Continued in part 3]
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness in anyone other than infants, and for all those that I have seen, the risk of death is high; and therefore, it seems to me that there is little hope for recovery in such cases.[The text seems to be expressing a sense of hopelessness or despair regarding the treatment of this medical condition in infants. The word "vi" means saw, and "malautia" means illness. So the text is saying that it has not seen this illness in anyone other than infants. The text also notes that all those who have this illness are at risk of death, suggesting that it is a serious and potentially life-threatening condition. Finally, the text states that there seems to be little hope for recovery in such cases, emphasizing the severity of the illness.] [Continued in part 4]
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and the child's head was always swollen to such an extent that it could not stop growing due to the excess fluid in its brain, which eventually led to death.[The text seems to be describing a severe case of hydrocephalus or another similar medical condition in which an infant's head is filled with fluid. The word "d’aygua" means of water, and "omplit" means filled. So the text is saying that the child's head was filled with water. The text also notes that the child's head was always swollen, suggesting that the condition was chronic or ongoing. Finally, the text mentions that the excess fluid in the brain eventually led to death, emphasizing the severity of the illness and the importance of seeking prompt medical treatment.] [Continued in part 5]
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this fluid may collect between the scalp and the skull, or it may collect beneath the skull on top of the brain.[The text seems to be describing two possible locations for the accumulation of fluid in the infant's head: between the scalp and the skull (the outer layer of the cranium), or beneath the skull on top of the brain. The word "humiditat" means fluid, and "agreguada" is collected. So the text is saying that this fluid may collect either between the scalp and the skull, or beneath the skull on top of the brain.] [Continued in part 6] [Quan lo cap de l’enfant es contengut d’aygua e sembla que sia un gran ventre, lahoras yeu comandeys que per aquel temps no se li dona leit, e que sian pausades sobre lu ventozas.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in this case, where the fluid is between the scalp and the skull and the abscess is small, it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure that is two finger-widths long, and this is the shape of the spatula:[The text seems to be describing a surgical procedure for treating an infant's head when there is fluid between the scalp and the skull and a small abscess. The word "operacio" means operation, and "humiditat" is fluid. So the text is saying that the procedure involves making an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure that is two finger-widths long. The text also notes that this incision should be made where the fluid is between the scalp and the skull, suggesting that this location is important for the success of the procedure. Finally, the text mentions a spatula, which may be a tool used in the procedure or a term for the shape of the incision.] [Continued in part 7]
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are here two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, a sign of this is that you see the corners of the head open on all sides and the water is expressed when you press it with your finger from the inside parts and this is not hidden.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle part of the head with three incisions in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and remove all the moisture with the incision; and strengthen the incisions with bandages and feathers; and irrigate that which is above with wine and oil within the fifth day, and loosen the ligament and cure the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And this is another manner of incision, which considers where the size of the abscess and the collection of water appear, for sometimes it is larger in the back of the head, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and so pay attention to where the abscess appears and the swelling of the water, and do that according to what is best for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and if blood flows, stop it quickly so that the patient does not die from this flow of blood due to the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capital II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are close to the ears, called "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	Capital III.[footnote]
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there occurs some catarrh or wounds in the eyes or chest, and it is old and not responding to medication treatment, then the final cure for this is the incision of those two arteries (the hilasseysse).
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so it is necessary when you want to incise those which the patient bends their head, and rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and straighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider how to feel the vein; and the location of each one close to the ears is depressed, and they are so hidden except in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And place a sign on the artery with lint, and incise each one with the blade of each side sharply so that the incision reaches the bone, and this should be according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the blade beneath the artery and cut it at the point where it branches above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be equal to two fingers in width, for when any vein is incised, blood exits with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the length of three fingers, and place a sign with lint, and cut down to the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what must be drained of the blood is the amount of a wine ounce. And let it drain very gently, neither more nor less, and all this is according to the amount which appears of the vitality of the patient and of the swelling of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And pay attention to the wound, and if there remains on the bone some cause of pus, then incise that so that it does not result in a dangerous abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And strengthen the wound with feathers and lint of cloth, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capital IV. (Note: I am assuming each sentence or group of sentences is a new "capitol" as per your formatting)
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the removal of the arteries which are located in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there occurs some old migraine or acute catarrh, due to moisture in the temples' ligaments or from old and violent swelling similar to those, and it is not responding to medical treatment methods, then we have resorted to this method for these illnesses: extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient bends their head so that the skin in the temples is stretched; and pay attention to the artery which is visible in the temple, for it beats and shows itself through pulsation, unless it is hidden in some men due to excess swelling. [https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/doctor-s-hands-performing-surgery-gm159308422-1647649](https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/doctor-s-hands-performing-surgery-gm159308422-1647649)
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then let the patient's neck be straightened with some cloth; and rub the area with rough fabric or warm water until the artery becomes visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the scalpel of which this is the shape: (Note: There was no description provided in the text for what this scalpel looks like)
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the skin off the bone with ease until you reach the artery; and let it bleed slightly, extracting it from above towards the upper parts until you remove it from the bone and uncover all of it from its surrounding membranes.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of your finger and make a small incision, according to the length by which its ends can be drawn out and contracted, and it will not result in blood flow, for if they are not incised, the blood will not drain from them completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And let there come out the amount of blood equal to a wine ounce. Between three and I am unsure what this refers to, as the text seems incomplete here. It might refer to a certain time frame or quantity, but it is not clear from the provided text.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two locations with strong double waxed thread or cords of length, and prevent its corruption before the healing of the wound, so that there will not be a blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then remove any excess tissue between the ligaments, and do this either at that time or at another time. [https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/doctor-s-hands-performing-surgery-gm159308422-1647649](https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/doctor-s-hands-performing-surgery-gm159308422-1647649)
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound with a scalpel cautery down to the bone where its ends are attached, and it will be an alternative method for closing the wound. (Note: This sentence appears to be incomplete, but I have provided a translation based on context and the common pattern of the text.)
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is of a warm constitution, for cautery belongs to those methods that aid in removing moisture, and thus it is better for helping. (Note: This sentence appears to be a general statement about the benefits of cautery as a medical treatment.)
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to perform the extraction of arteries in a location that has healed well, and place cotton over it, neatly prepared, and then cure it with dry medicines and poultices that cause flesh to grow and blisters until it is healed. (Note: This sentence appears to be a general statement about the importance of performing medical procedures on clean and healthy areas and using appropriate treatments for wound healing.)
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while performing another procedure there occurs blood flow from the artery, then you should quickly stop that blood flow, either by using cautery or filling the location with a dressing, and strengthen your hand in such a way as to restrict the blood flow. (Note: This sentence appears to be a general statement about the importance of controlling bleeding during medical procedures.)
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those methods are available to you, then place your finger on the location until the blood clots, and irrigate the area with very hot water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as needed. (Note: This sentence appears to be a general statement about alternative methods for controlling bleeding during medical procedures.)[https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/doctor-s-hands-holding-scalpel-and-gauze-gm159308624-1647653](https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/doctor-s-hands-holding-scalpel-and-gauze-gm159308624-1647653)
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the easier aspect of artery extraction is to cauterize the vein using this cautery having two blades, as you mark both locations with lint and place each blade, lightly ignited, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two locations, so that what is between its ends can be drawn out, for it will not heal completely with this cautery. (Note: This sentence appears to describe a specific technique for controlling bleeding during artery extraction by also cauterizing the adjacent vein.)
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of both blades be exemplary. (Note: This sentence appears to be incomplete, as there is no description provided for what the "exemplary" sharpness should be like.)
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if their sharpness is less than that of two blades, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two blades, then the risk of cutting through flesh too quickly is increased. (Note: This sentence appears to be a general statement about the importance of using appropriate sharpness when performing surgical procedures.)
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	And so, with their thickness, the heat of the fire is maintained in them and the flesh is cut more easily. (Note: This sentence appears to be a general statement about using appropriately sized surgical instruments for cauterization.)
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and lighter. (Note: This sentence appears to be a general statement about the benefits of using appropriately sized surgical instruments for cauterization.)
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two blades be equal to the width of a finger. (Note: This sentence appears to describe the size or distance between the blades of a surgical instrument, likely related to cauterization.)
Capitol quart.	Capital IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care of bodily ailments from sharp and acrid tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When it is sharp and acrid tears (coming) from the veins which are on top of the head, for which no cause of medical treatment confers a cure, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and there is a sensation in the forehead like ants crawling, and the nails of those affected become thin, heated and their hair falls out, and the eyelids are scraped by the sharpness of the tears. The old remedies for the cure of these symptoms through this operation are named, and they call this cure with spasms.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is commanded that the patient should shave the hairs which are on their forehead and then make three incisions equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: let one incision be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small finger's movement which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision near the arteries which are in two places, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both the jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And for each incision, adjust the space to be three fingers wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge ready or dry cloths with which to dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision: [Here probably follows a diagram or illustration.]
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which extends from the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape with that all the skin which is between two incisions with the convex part which is on the bone, and then do so from the middle of the first incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then pull out this spatula and insert again another instrument in the first incision, called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp edge of that against the attached flesh against the skin, and the blunt side down onto the bone, and insert it in such a way that it reaches the middle incision and with that cut all the veins which descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But continue the incision so that it extends from the skin, and then do the same with the middle incision to the other incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when enough blood flows, press on the areas of the sponges soaked in coagulated blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each incision a piece of old linen cloth and place on top of them powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and see that pus does not develop and cause cautery to be necessary.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer an abundant infusion of hot water or chamomile tea, and then cure it with basilicon ointment with rose oil and other things for healing wounds.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Concerning the cure for tears (of the eyes) through catharsis and humors descending from the interior parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the catharsis is sharp and continuous, and sometimes the patient's nails become thin and small, and their appearance is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and their hair has fallen out, and in the front of their head there is a sharp and biting pain with subsequent exhaustion, then one knows by these signs that the matter and catharsis do not come from large veins but rather from small veins proceeding from the interior parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for this is as follows: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of that area, one finger wide (starting from the left temple to the right temple) so that it reaches the bone; keep your hand away from the ligaments of the temples which are damaged due to chewing. The bone should be exposed through this incision.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and then insert between the two lips of the incision old linen or bandages, filling it completely.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen above with powders mixed with wine and oil to prevent inflammation or suppuration from occurring.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has diminished, it is necessary to rub the bone inside where the flesh begins to grow, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to disappear, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and from it make a plaster and apply it to these fleshy wounds.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the treatment of what comes out of the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of all discharge from the ears falls into one of four categories: it is either mineral-like or similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or it comes from plants like cheese or beans, or it is watery like water and sour wine and their likes, or it comes from some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when stone or any similar cause that does not belong or fit in the ear comes out of the ear, place the ear towards the sun and if you see the stone, then distill some violet oil or cedarwood oil on it, and then administer extraction, and make them sneeze with caution, and close their nostrils at the occurrence of a sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some wool or cloth wads in the ear canal, and pull the ear upwards to stretch the ear parts, because often these foreign bodies are pushed in with these causes (i.e., by cotton swabs).
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it (the foreign object) is not removed, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called the "gesti epicicarios" which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"And if it (the foreign object) is pushed in further with the instrument, that's good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a thin probe of double thickness."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And therefore, if it is not pushed in further by that (the thin probe), then make a cannula from silver and insert the end of the cannula into the opening of the ear canal, and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula enters, but nothing else."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"Then extract with strong suction, because often as we have said."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it is not pushed in further in this way, then take some alum-infused clay or a heated medical instrument with which the wings are pressed together in small amounts and place it at the end of the rod and then wrap it decently around the area."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"Then insert that into the opening of the ear canal with ease and then dry out the ear from any moisture."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And therefore, if it is not removed by all the causes that we have mentioned, then you must consider cutting it out before it leads to an abscess or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"And the method for cutting it out is to first anesthetize the patient by tapping on the saphenous vein and extracting blood according to its virtue, then place your finger over the ear canal and turn the ear upwards. Then make a small incision in the cartilage of the ear, where you have pressed with your finger."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the incision be crescent-shaped, reaching the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments if possible; then quickly close the incision and cure it until healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause of the discharge in the ear is one of the waxes that are formed and swollen, then administer the cure and extraction for it; but if it does not obey your remedy, then take fresh soft sponge and shape it as follows:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"And administer with this the abscess of that wax that has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"And do not do this if you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on many wads, and then extract it with thin probes or instruments as we have said, for the extraction will be made easier."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But in the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with caution at first, and fill the healthy ear with some old cotton and cover it with a cloth over the ear with water, and if it is removed by this, it's good; otherwise, take many thin pieces of wax and linen according to the length of your finger, heat them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of those into the opening of their ear and jump on that foot on the same side and strike with a stone on the piece of wax inside the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"And do not stop doing this with the stone until all the water is removed."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And once the water is removed, you can take paper or cloth..." "And place one end of it (paper or cloth) in the ear and stretch out the other end with fire until most of it is burned."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And place another cloth and do that many times until all the water is removed, and straighten it with a cannula as was said earlier about the stone extractor."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"But in the removal of an animal that enters the ear, if it is a small creature like a tick or something similar, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large creature that causes pain and visible discomfort, then administer extraction with forceps and probes. And the cause of this is easier to deal with than any other cause that can affect the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"But in the removal of a worm born in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary to observe the ear in sunlight."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And therefore, if any cause of the worm appears, then extract it with forceps or thin probes. But if no such cause is visible, then take a cannula that is narrow below and wide above, and this is its shape:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"And insert the thin end of the cannula into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck with it by strong suction and do this many times until all the worms are removed."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"But if it does not obey your remedy, then you should close and seal the opening of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have been proven by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And your effusion should be with which you pour the medical oils into the ear using this instrument, the shape of which is as follows:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make one of silver or iron, narrow, with a small hole, and place it over it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so let it be like a plug that is in the cavity of the continuant canal here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap it appropriately at its end, then gently pour oil in the cavity of the ear, or juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the funnel - which is in the ear canal -, and then carefully insert the wrapped rod with the cloth into the funnel and press it gently with your hand so that the oil is expelled slowly inside the ear canal and the patient will feel the oil going in.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should be heated slightly with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the liquid you will instill in the ear is not too cold, because ear medications do not tolerate it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of blockage in the ear.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some infants get blocked ears because their Eustachian tubes are not yet perforated, and this can also happen to some adults due to blockage in the ear canal caused by wax or flesh that has grown inside it; sometimes this blockage occurs in the ear drum without the person realizing it, while other times it is located outside of the ear drum.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the eardrum without causing noticeable symptoms is often associated with more difficult treatment and healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where the blockage is noticeable, it is advisable to expose the patient's ear to sunlight and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so, if you see a visible blockage, open it with a thin spatula of the following form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	The tip of the spatula should be narrow and have one side sharp while the other side is not, and it should be two finger widths wide to avoid damaging the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so, if the blockage is caused by flesh grown in the ear or its canal, then use fine hooks and gently but firmly scrape it until all of the excess flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is in the eardrum, then take a thin rod and heat it slightly with fire, then carefully insert it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have detected blockage because the patient is having difficulty hearing, then gently relieve the pressure with ease and be careful not to damage the ear's nerves.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the ear a piece of cloth according to the size of the opening that you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound, or take some and submerge it in water and pulverize it over it, repeat this three times a day and if you see that the ear has become inflamed, then it is necessary to lance it and replace it with another piece of cloth wrapped in wax made with rose oil until the swelling subsides; then heal it until it heals completely.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding, then soak a sponge or cloth in water and lay it on the ear and use the other treatment that stops the bleeding, which is called "distillation" in the treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of blepharitis, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Blepharitis can occur in both eyes and it can be either due to excessive moisture or dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is necessary to have tweezers or hooks and use a spatula with its edges to gently scrape off the crusts, then place this over the affected area three times a day.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with bleeding, then you should use a fine lancet to cauterize the affected area.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best method of cauterization is to make several incisions and remove any remaining pieces of crusts, which can then be burned off with fire, preventing them from returning.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Of the treatment of styes that occur on the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Styes are often caused by various factors that make them similar to chalazion in terms of hardness and durability, which is why they are also called "chalazion".
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And this is caused by an accumulation of thick moisture both inside and outside the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the treatment for styes is to first determine if it is caused by an infection that has spread beyond the eyelid and affects other parts of the eye, in which case the cause is usually minor.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And then make an incision along its length and gently scrape off the pus from all sides until it dries out, then use tweezers to remove the hardened crusts.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared to make an incision, then gently insert the lancet into the eyelid little by little until it reaches the affected area; this should also work.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then use stitches to close it and heal it until it heals completely.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then there will be no harm in leaving it alone since the pus will eventually dry up and heal on its own.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the stye is located on the inner surface of the eyelid and pointing towards its interior, then carefully lift the eyelid and use tweezers to gently pull it outwards before making an incision; if the eyelid is too thin or fragile, there's no need to make an incision.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And begin by washing the wound with salt water; and heal the area with that which fleshes itself once it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of a chancre on the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A chancre is an inflammation that occurs in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it most commonly affects children. It makes their eyes sore and can lead to problems with their vision, as they are unable to look at bright light due to tears forming in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you will often see these children constantly rubbing their eyes and sleeping with them closed. The eyelashes of their lower eyelids are damp, indicating that there is an inflammation covering the area, and it is apparent that a chancre is about to form on the eye. Additionally, if you press gently on the area with your fingers, you will feel that a chancre has already begun to form.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One way to treat this condition is for the patient to place their head over a steaming pot of water and hot cloths are placed on them to induce sweating. A circle is then made around the affected area that is just large enough to contain arternach (a type of clay) from all sides, and this circle is placed over the affected area. The area is then pressed firmly with the fingers, causing the chancre to be pushed into the center of the circle. Then, a small incision is made in the center of the humidity with a sharp instrument, such as a scalpel, and the incision should not be any larger than the incision made during bloodletting (a medical procedure where blood is drawn from a vein).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	However, in more severe cases, it is necessary to cut the entire abscess until you reach the arternach (clay), as in such cases, arternach is present in the depths of the wound and can be seen through a white-colored fissure.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those cloths that you have wrapped around the area with your fingers and unroll them between your right and left hands until they are spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure that you do not touch the incision with your fingers when using the scalpel, so that you do not accidentally cut into the eye.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the clay in the beginning of the incision, then continue to cut into the wound until you reach the clay, but make sure that you only cut a small amount at a time. After making the incision, remove the cloths as described earlier and soak some rags in a mixture of water and wine and place them over the affected area. Then, secure the rags in place with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if there is any pus present, sprinkle salt on it and place it in the concavity of the incision so that it absorbs any remaining moisture from the wound.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And continue to treat the wound until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if a boil forms in the area of the incision, then treat it with sedative plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods for touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelashes on the eyes become ingrown due to natural growth and are old, this can lead to various ailments such as constant tearing and swelling of the eyelids, which can ultimately result in destruction of the eye known as tactinir of the eye. There are four ways to treat this condition: using cautery with fire; using sharp medicine as previously described in the chapter on cautery; performing atactini (a type of surgical procedure) by making an incision and stitching it up; or using cannulas (small tubes used to drain fluids from the body).
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so it is necessary for you to position the patient's head towards your lap; then, use your left hand to turn the eyelid of the affected eye upwards. If you are able to do this, then proceed with the treatment. However, if you cannot turn the eyelid upwards, insert a needle into the part of the eyelid that is closest to the pus-filled area, and push the needle through the fleshy part of the eyelid so that it comes out just above the edge of the eyelid, near where the eyelashes grow. Then, use the needle to pull the pus out of the eyelid, and turn the eyelid upwards using your hand.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then make an incision in the inner part of the lower eyelid, just below the ingrown lashes, using a sharp instrument such as a scalpel or lancet. After making the incision, remove the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid. Then, apply a bandage over the eyelid with a shape similar to that of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important that the shape of the bandage corresponds to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, as this can vary from person to person. In some cases, a large portion of the upper eyelid may need to be incised in order to accommodate for the degree of swelling.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then make an incision with the scalpel along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger tear duct and moving towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural lashes, make it as thick as a royal coin (presumably referring to a large, heavy coin).
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place a small piece of linen in one of the corners of the wound and remove all of the excess skin from around it. Next, use fine wool or thread to stitch together the two sides of the incision, and clean away any blood that may have accumulated. If you wish, you can use some sticky substances to attach any excess pieces of flesh to the eyebrows. However, this is not necessary.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the stitches in place for three or four days, and then remove them.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, you can leave the wound unstitched and treat it with drying and constricting agents, as the eyelid will become swollen due to the sealing of the wound and its healing process. However, it is generally better to use stitches. This is what the ancients would have done.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, if the patient is concerned about the wound, it is best to address their concerns and proceed with caution, rather than causing them unnecessary fear or distress.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Another method for treating the wound is to place a myrtle leaf-shaped bandage over the eyelid and use three separate and connected hooks to lift the eyelid in the following manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	However, if that is not possible, use hooks and make sure they are clean. If they are not clean, take a needle with thread and insert it into the center of the bandage shape. Then, place one end of the thread near the larger tear duct and the other end near the smaller tear duct, and adjust the placement of the threads evenly between your fingers. Finally, use your hand to lift the entire eyelid, along with the bandage, as previously described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then stitch together the two sides of the wound and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	However, if a boil forms near your incision or wound, treat it with a salve and similar substances, as well as with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes the eyelashes may become ingrown, in which case it is necessary to use the method that I described earlier for making an incision. However, stitching is more artificial and should be used in some cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Treating tactinir with cannulas is done in the following manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	The first step is to turn the eyelid and make an incision along the inner edge, as I have previously described. Then, create two thin cannulas or rods that are the same length as the eyelid and narrower in width than the scalpel.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then carefully attach each section to the excess skin of the eyelid with delicacy, and tightly bind the cannulas of each section with strong force, leaving them in place for several days. The eyelid will die and become necrotic due to the tight binding, and it will eventually fall out on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then lance the abscess with a knife, and immediately cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when the eyelid is swollen, it is raised and the lashes do not prick (meaning the swelling has gone down).
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two tubes, which you will make according to this form.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should be of the same length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of lifting prickly hairs on the eye with a needle when the hair is hard (tough).
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough and prickly on the eye, then the operation in it is that you take a fine needle and place its tip in a fine cedar wood or lion's claw, and make sure to adjust the ends of it very delicately, with each end having a small knob.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be of the quantity of one palm. (Palm refers to the width of the hand)
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then you make another fine needle below it in a short time, and use its ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head in your lap, and do it near the sunlight so that your work is clear, for this is a delicate and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle in the root of the hair with precision, which requires skill, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract the one below the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the hair out above and insert the needle into the incision, and let there be one or two or three hairs, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull your hand with it until the hair is extracted with the incision in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled with the incision and the hair is not extracted, then pull the incision towards the bottom with the needle that you have made until the incision of the upper tear is extracted.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you will know this with the vision of the eye, for then you will extract the incision and needle, and the wound will be healed, and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and new flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter than the natural hairs, then you adjust a long hair to match the natural hairs and raise it with that or let it stay until it grows longer over some space, and then you raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of hematoma that appears on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When hematoma appears on the eye and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, or to the right or left side due to poor healing of wounds or incisions or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this hematoma can be natural or accidental, made by healing of wounds or incisions or cauterizations or similar causes. [https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/leporine](https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/leporine)
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation for this is that you break up the scar tissue and separate its lips, place a piece of linen cloth in it where there is space between them, and bind those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not appropriate to use treatment for this condition that dries or constricts, because if you do so, it can cause a return of hematoma even worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for this a treatment that softens such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with crushed leaves and seeds of it or any similar herb, which is liquefied with one of the oils, and submerge the cloth in it and cure with it. Fenugreek has anti-inflammatory properties that may help reduce swelling.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The key to your treatment is that you carefully perforate and break up the scar tissue that has not healed properly, as was done at the beginning of treatment.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is only a correction of hematoma, which does not return the form of the area as it was before. This means that while the treatment may be effective in reducing the hematoma, it will not restore the eyelid to its previous appearance completely.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of hematoma that occurs on the lower eyelid. [https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Hematoma](https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Hematoma) The term "ehacrati" is not a medical term, but it seems to be referring to hematoma in this context. [
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hematoma that occurs on the lower eyelid, which is truly called hematoma, can be either natural or accidental in origin. The term "vertadierament" means "truly" in old French and it emphasizes that "alxacrati" (hematoma) is its correct name.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But an accidental hematoma is caused by wounds, incisions, cauterization or other similar causes. This means that it's not a natural occurrence but rather caused by external factors such as injury or surgical procedure.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operating on this type of hematoma is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh. Then, pass it from the lacrimal (tear duct) of the left side to the lacrimal of the right side, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh. The term "lacrimal" refers to the tear duct in medical language.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then pull the skin apart with the needle and stitch it up with the needle, and make an incision wide enough using a spatula. The term "spatum" refers to a surgical instrument that was used for making incisions or separating tissues.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper form, that is good; and if not, take a scalpel and place it in the split shape, then use the scalpel to adjust the shape of the lower eyelid, creating two incisions on the edge of the lower eyelid. The term "latz" means "edge" or "margin" in old French.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two incisions be at the two angles of the cut that you made, where they meet, and make sure that the angle formed when they come together is even and creates a proper shape for them. The term "concurren" means "come together" in old French. The text describes making two incisions on the edge of the lower eyelid, and then adjusting the shape by ensuring the angles formed are even and symmetrical. This step helps to ensure that the eyelid heals properly and maintains its proper shape.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (λ). The incisions made on the edge of the lower eyelid are in the shape of the Greek letter lambda, which looks like an upside-down "V". This technique was used to adjust the shape and position of the eyelid.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the skin from it by an amount equal to the edge of it below, so that the eyelid is dried. The term "osta" means "remove". This step is used to remove excess skin and adjust the position of the lower eyelid to ensure proper closure and prevent dryness. The text specifies that the amount of skin removed should be equal to the edge of the eyelid below, ensuring a symmetrical and proportional correction.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then bring together the separated parts and stitch them with wool thread, and treat those areas with the softening medicines and dressings until they heal. This step is important to ensure proper healing of the incisions made on the lower eyelid and prevent any complications such as infection or scarring. The use of softening medicines and dressings will help reduce inflammation, promote healing and improve the cosmetic appearance of the eyelid.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If the hematoma forms due to a cut or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary to make an incision with a flat cut over the hairs of the eyelid as previously described. This step helps to release any accumulated blood or fluid under the skin and promote healing by allowing new tissue to form in the affected area. The text emphasizes that this technique should be used when hematoma is caused by cuts, stitches or cauterization.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with dressing between two lips as we have said. This means that after making the incision and removing any excess tissue, the wound should be packed with dressings to help absorb any fluid or blood and promote healing. The text emphasizes the importance of separating the edges of the wound with dressings, which helps to ensure proper healing and reduces the risk of scarring. This is similar to modern-day wound care practices where wounds are often packed with medicated gauze or other types of dressing material.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, the treatment for hematoma, whether it is above or below the eyelid, should be done with care and in a way that matches the form of the hematoma, which can vary in many ways. This means that each case of hematoma must be treated individually, taking into account its specific shape, size, location and underlying cause. The text emphasizes the importance of careful assessment and planning in the treatment of hematoma to ensure optimal outcomes and minimize the risk of complications.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And wise practitioners always prepare in every possible way the necessary skill and techniques to restore the shape of the affected area as close to its natural form or as near as possible, depending on what is appropriate for each patient's condition during the operation and with the use of various instruments. This means that medical professionals must be skilled, knowledgeable and adaptable in order to provide effective care and achieve optimal outcomes for their patients. They should be prepared to use a variety of techniques and tools in order to address the unique needs and challenges presented by each case of hematoma or other medical condition.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Chapter 15: On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is adhered above with the white part of the eye, and it is prevented from moving freely or performing its natural functions, then it is necessary to insert the blade of a scalpel under the eyelid, and raise it up or stretch it using forceps. This procedure aims to separate the adhered parts and allow for normal movement and functioning of the eyelid and eye. It requires skill and care to avoid causing further injury or damage to the delicate tissues involved. The text emphasizes that this is a necessary step in treating this condition, as it can significantly impact vision and quality of life if left untreated.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should make an incision along the adhesion using a fine scalpel that is not too sharp-edged, so as not to cause further injury or damage. Make sure to use a blunt tip to minimize discomfort for the patient during the operation. Leave the scalpel in place to avoid damaging the eye with its sharp edge. The text emphasizes the need to perform this procedure carefully and skillfully, using appropriate tools and techniques to minimize the risk of further injury or complications. It is important to prioritize the patient's comfort and safety throughout the operation.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should serve to remove the adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesion is fully healed. This means that the procedure should be performed carefully and skillfully, with attention to detail and an awareness of the unique needs and circumstances of each patient. The text emphasizes the importance of careful assessment, planning, and execution in treating medical conditions such as adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea. It highlights the need for medical professionals to be knowledgeable, skilled, and adaptable in order to provide effective care and achieve optimal outcomes for their patients.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you should put saltwater in the eye, which you use to rinse it, or distill in it juniper dissolved in water. This means that after performing the incision and removing any excess tissue or adhesion, it is important to clean and irrigate the area with a sterile solution to promote healing and prevent infection. The text suggests using saltwater or a solution of juniper berries dissolved in water for this purpose. Juniper has antiseptic and anti-inflammatory properties that may help reduce swelling, pain, and risk of infection.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate between the eyelid and eye with dressing, and place on the eye wool that has been soaked in egg white, and then for three days use healing remedies until it heals. This means that after performing the incision and removing any excess tissue or adhesion, it is important to use appropriate dressings and medications to promote healing and prevent infection. The text suggests using a dressing made of wool soaked in egg white, which has been used as a natural remedy for wound healing due to its nutrient-rich and anti-inflammatory properties. Additionally, the text recommends using healing remedies for three days until the area is fully healed. The use of appropriate dressings and medications is crucial in ensuring proper healing and preventing any complications or recurrence of adhesion.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16:
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Chapter 16: On the Incision of a Nail and Fleshiness of the Tear Ducts
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the nail can be of two types: it is either nervous or non-nervous. A nervous nail resembles hard and thin bone, while a non-nervous nail is similar to white congealed moisture. When you touch it with forceps, if it feels solid, you must use forceps to remove it by cutting it off, without inserting the forceps into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types (of nails) do not begin until the lacrimal major, where it gradually covers the sight and prevents light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in the incision is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then you open the patient's eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then use forceps to gently collect the nail with minimal doubling and stretch it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert in it a horsehair or of a bull or a cow, or similar, or strong vitriol, or gradually double the extremity of the needle and place it in the middle of the nail, and insert it with the needle, and bind the nail with vitriol; and extend it to the surrounding areas, and remove with the hair the pus from under the nail which dries up the pustule.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And similarly, you follow that with the hair inside the anus of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you make an incision in the root of the eyelash with a thin spatula or small tweezers, and remove the flesh from the eyelid naturally so that as a result of the incision there is no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with only one ounce of lead or vitriol, as we said, and then remove carefully with a spatula in the shape of a lion, which is its form. (I'm not sure about this translation, it seems like it could be describing a medical instrument used for removing nails)
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And make sure that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue and that it breaks in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make an incision in the ear and put in it a little bit of crushed salt or sulfur powder, and leave it inside for another day; and then take care of it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle or it's not possible to place the ounce in it, then many times this type of nail is cured with medicine, and it heals as a blister does according to the division (I'm not sure about the meaning of "division" here).
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to make an incision in it (the ear), then open the ear of the patient and take a thin spatula shaped like a lion with sharpened edge, according to this form. (Again, I'm not sure about this translation)
am subtilitat.	With subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it (the ear) is scarred and hidden and you find this ridge in it, then distill oil from your finger into the ear made of sulfur powder or red chalk or crushed salt, and fill up the ear for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is in it (the ear) has come out, unless an opposing abscess forms in the ear, and in that case you leave it alone, and take care of the abscess first until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it with caution until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the eyelid flesh, if noticed on the eyelid to great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and make an incision in it from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut and cause continuous flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill red chalk and sulfur powder into the eyelid until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About incision of an ingrown nail and what is born from flesh attached to the eyelid. [Edit: I see now that this chapter title refers to the previous section, not the next one.]
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Many times in the corners of the eyes, flesh grows red and covers the pupil or approaches and presses on the eyelids, lightly compressing the eyelids to the surrounding areas and appearing like a swelling on a railing. [Edit: I believe that "alcus" here refers to the corner of the eye. The text describes a condition where excess tissue grows in the inner corner of the eye, which can cause discomfort or even block vision.] | keyphrase: red flesh growing in inner corner of the eye |
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation for the patient is that they place their head in your lap; and then open the wounds of that one and collect all the flesh with suitable ligatures for that, and do this with a forceps or a knife; and then cut through the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the cautery, and be careful not to damage the wound as you carry out your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be the one with which you cut those [wounds], or with a spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which the ashes are collected according to the shape of it, as described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Once your incision is complete and all the flesh has been cut away, then fill the wound with three times as much salt, or distill red powder on it that resembles the dust of corrosive medicines, and place a bandage made of white cloth over the wound until it is healed from abscess cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of guarding against gangrene and bleeding cautiously, and you fear abscess cautery, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what is appropriate for it until it heals from abscess cautery, and similarly repeat the operation on the flesh that has been cut in this way until it heals.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all care of the wound is free from any natural or accidental harm, by using iron and not putting your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	About collecting ashes in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Ashes are red and harden on the wound, which prevents urination and delays healing for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the wound in which there is ash is strong and does not have any other illness than ash, then you collect that ash.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with one or two ounces according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle doubling according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces, gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be tied with thin ligatures, with subtlety, and wipe the blood away from time to time until you see that the veins have been separated from the wound and are relaxed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the wound with the tip of the spatula; and if your operation is in the afternoon before the sun, then be very firm in your operation so that you only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then you distill in the wound chief vert or red so that with its sharpness it corrodes what has been separated from the ash.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then you bandage all with what relieves the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain is calm and healed from abscess cautery.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And similarly repeat on it according to the same method until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	About reducing fractures in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cautery or burning medicine, as preceded in its narration, and it is not healed, then do not bandage it but instead cut open the abscess until it matures, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you reduce it with an instrument of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named "aspre cap", and it should be made of iron, and its head should be round like a finger that is pointed with a file or an awl according to subtle puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, and press lightly with your hand until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it and the parts of the wound have healed and it has remained for 40 days without being renewed or becoming abscessed or any accident occurring in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then do not bandage it but instead reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: which is that you uncover the second bone with iron or burning medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then take tribo according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of it be triangular and the shaft of it be thin at the end as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that on the bone, and let it be next to the lacrimal; and move your hand a little from the wound, and then rotate your hand with tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient will feel this as if they have wind coming out of them when you touch the area.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And then restore the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the flesh grows and the area hardens, then the matter that flowed out to the parts returns to the nose, so it is a light burden for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	About reducing the prominence of the wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the wound protrudes with its entirety and no harm or decrease occurs in the surrounding area, then it is necessary to loosen the patient, and make them walk and place warm compresses on their neck without scarification and suck the pus out of it with good suction; and also place a liniment on the wound made of acetra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and also strengthen the poultice on the wound with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of powders is that you take linen cloth from lions and fold each cloth into four layers; and make powders from these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And also place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And also strengthen those with hard cloth and strong tightening; and repeat the warm compresses with good suction without scarification; and remove the warm compresses and leave the wound closed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament becomes soft, then it is necessary to make it tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And also remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, then it is good, and if not, then repeat the poultice with powders and tightening and warm compresses until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	About the incision of the prominence of the tunica uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea and it protrudes like a raisin outside the eyelids, with the shape of a man's head, and you want to incise it, then the operation for this is as we have recommended: that you insert the needle into the corner of the uvea from the lower part to the upper part, and then insert another needle in which there is double thread on the side near the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the area of the double thread and lift with it the piece of uvea in the circumference of the needle, and strengthen this with many powders.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool soaked in white of egg and leave it until the thread comes out with the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with what comforts it until the illness is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Sometimes, gathering from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen area, and then it should be pierced with a sharp lancet to reach the core of the swelling, and let the serous humidity run out, and then the swelling will go down and enter back in quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And apply strength (treatment) until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.[unclear if this is part of the previous text or not, assuming it is a new sentence]
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of abscesses. (Alconati is an old term used to refer to abscesses)
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called alconata, is nothing but pus that has gathered in the swelling resembling descending water and it's not that. (The author is distinguishing between an abscess and other types of swellings, describing an abscess as pus gathered in a swelling)
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to work on it is to have the patient sit upright on a prepared seat and then take their head in your hands from both sides and hold it steady as you observe the pus flowing downwards, prevent it from descending further and keep the area clean, allowing the patient to see what's happening just as before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water (The author is explaining how to differentiate between pus and other types of fluid)
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the pus is not prepared to flow downwards, as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a sharp lancet and incise with it over the subcutaneous tissue, just next to the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunica in the crown (into the affected area), until all the pus is drained.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is drained, then you distill on the wound warm water with broth in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let it heal with other causes until it is healed (The author is emphasizing the importance of following up on treatment and ensuring proper healing)
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.[unclear if this is part of the previous text or not, assuming it is a new chapter heading]
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of fluid accumulation in the body (The author is starting a new topic, discussing how to treat fluid buildup)
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of fluids in the body and which ones should be drained through words (i.e. verbally discussing with the patient), now it depends on their health condition (The author is summarizing the previous discussion about different types of fluids and indicating that treatment options depend on the patient's overall health)
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary for you to sit the patient between your hands on a cushion and tie their affected limb so that it is raised (The author is describing the first step in treating fluid accumulation by elevating the affected limb) [unclear if "liar" should be "liar" or "leiar", assuming it's "liar"]
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected limb if the swelling is in the left limb, or with your right hand if it's in the right limb (The author is describing the next step in treating fluid accumulation by positioning the hand near the affected area) [unclear if "es" should be "es" or "est", assuming it's "es"][unclear if "le huel senestra" should be "le huel es la sinestra" or "le huel si es la sinestra", assuming it's "le huel es la sinestra"]
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take a piece of almagro (a type of clay or mud) if the swelling is in the left limb, or with your left hand if it's in the right limb (The author is describing the next step in treating fluid accumulation by using a piece of almagro to draw out the fluid) [unclear if "es" should be "es" or "est", assuming it's "es"][unclear if "le huel senestra" should be "le huel es la sinestra" or "le huel si es la sinestra", assuming it's "le huel es la sinestra"]
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of the almagro near the crown by the size of the radius in the white part of the eye next to the inner corner and press gently with your hand on it (The author is describing the final step in treating fluid accumulation by applying gentle pressure with the almagro)
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then press gently on the white part of the eye until you feel that the almagro has reached its intended target (The author is emphasizing the importance of gentle pressure and feeling for when the almagro has taken effect)
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the width of the path of almagro to the core be the same as the space between the pupil and the edge of the blackness (i.e. iris), which is the crown of the eye, so you can see with the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunica (The author is describing the correct positioning and size of the almagro application)
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almagro in the area where the fluid is located and gently pull it downwards repeatedly, and when the fluid descends quickly, tell the patient to look at what is happening on their skin and to keep the almagro on their affected limb (The author is describing how to use the almagro to encourage fluid drainage and recommending that the patient pay attention during treatment)
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while, and if the fluid has descended, wait until just before the almagro falls off (The author is emphasizing the importance of resting during treatment and waiting until the appropriate time to reapply the almagro)
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and no longer descends, gently remove the almagro and wash your hands with it, then dissolve a little bit of rock salt in water and use that to clean the affected area. Then place a bandage or cloth infused with rose oil and egg white over the affected limb (The author is describing how to treat the skin after using the almagro)
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those who are of our time place three hundred on that mixture with egg whites (The author is acknowledging a variation in treatment methods and indicating that some practitioners use three times the amount of egg whites described earlier)
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the almagro does not penetrate the inside of the limb due to its hardness (for there are some men whose skin is very thick), then it is necessary for you to take a lancet called alberit, and this is its form: (The author is introducing an alternative treatment method if the almagro is not effective)
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with that lancet through the connective tissue and do not deepen your hand into the wound, but only create a small passage for the almagro (The author is describing how to use the alternative treatment method)
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the almagro as we have said (The author is emphasizing that the alternative treatment method should still involve using almagro)
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work by preparing a comfortable bed for the patient to lie on with their back flat in a dark room, and they should be prohibited from any movements (The author is emphasizing the importance of rest and quiet during treatment)
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And let them rest in their natural state so that their nature is calmed and does not harm their head or any other part of the body (The author is emphasizing the importance of resting in a comfortable position during treatment)
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let them be restrained according to their disposition for three days (The author is emphasizing the importance of rest and restricting movement during treatment) [Note: "liament" here likely refers to the use of bandages or other forms of restraint]
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release them from restraint in that dark room and allow them to see some things and encourage them to look at various causes, and then reapply the restraints by the seventh day (The author is describing how to gradually increase stimulation during treatment and emphasizing the importance of rest) [Note: "deslia" here likely refers to releasing the patient from restraint. "freol vista" may refer to a type of visual restriction or blindfold used in traditional medicine]
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or immediately before or after an infusion (The author is emphasizing the importance of timing and caution during treatment)
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And it is necessary for you to avoid doing this because water can easily flow with great force and vigilance (The author is emphasizing the importance of caution during treatment)
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if you encounter an abscess, then it is necessary to release the limb before the seventh day and correct that with what reduces abscesses (The author is describing how to modify treatment for a specific condition) [Note: "apostema" here likely refers to a type of abscess or collection of pus in the body. "rectifica" may refer to applying a topical treatment or using a medical instrument]
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And then you are released from observing them and place your hand on their mouth so that they can be fed for several days in a dark room (The author is describing how to modify treatment for the final stages of recovery)
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let them gradually leave that dark room and converse with various things (The author is emphasizing the importance of gradually increasing stimulation during treatment and allowing for recovery) [Note: "gitat" here likely refers to being released from restraint or restriction, while "conversa8" may refer to engaging in conversation or social interaction]
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in Alchemy, the student is not exempt from seeing various things and therefore you should be bold in your work (The author is making a reference to Alchemy and emphasizing the importance of observation and experimentation during treatment)
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now some of those who are knowledgeable in the art have come to us and said that they make a fire in the almagro, which has been pierced with a needle, for this is how the water descends (The author is describing an alternative treatment method involving making a fire in the almagro, which may have been used as a type of cauterization or heat therapy) [Note: "Artach" here likely refers to a specific medical tradition or practice, while "Ayrac magdaam" may refer to a type of medical instrument]
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen this in our land nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients, and it is possible that this is a new thing (The author is expressing skepticism about the alternative treatment method and questioning its origins)
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the types of almagro for use on those who do not know about it (The author is summarizing the different types of almagro and their uses)
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of earth or iron properly, and their ends are shaped like this with triangular subtlety, the pointed end being sharp like this in form (The author is describing the physical appearance of the almagro instruments) [Note: "eram" here likely refers to a type of clay or mud, while "ferr" may refer to iron or another metal. The use of earth or metal for medical instruments was common in traditional medicine]
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24. (indicating the beginning of a new topic)
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh that is decayed in the nose (The author is introducing a new topic on treating tissue damage or infection in the nose)
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When flesh has grown in the nose that is diverse and joined together, which has some cause similar to a scorpion with heavy sting or like a polyp foot, and this illness is called polyps because it resembles the represented foot (The author is describing a type of nasal tissue growth that is caused by an infection or inflammation, likely referring to what is now known as nasal polyps) [Note: "scorpio de motz pes" may refer to a scorpion-like appearance with a heavy sting. "polip peys" may refer to a polyp-like growth that resembles a foot]
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And the flesh is cancerous, ulcerated, of dark color, and it is like a lion's flesh but not of dark color (The author is describing some characteristics of the nasal tissue growth, including cancer-like symptoms such as being ulcerated and having a dark color) [Note: "cancrosa" here likely refers to a type of cancer or abnormal tissue growth. "lapadea" may refer to a condition where the flesh is damaged or eroded. "fusca" may refer to a dark, blackish-brown color]
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	And in those that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to have the patient sit upright with their head between your hands and exposed to sunlight, and observe their nostrils, and then pick at those growths with a small instrument (The author is describing how to treat non-cancerous nasal tissue growth using exposure to sunlight and careful observation) [Note: "fraudulenta" may refer to growths that are not genuine or real. "onci" may refer to a type of medical instrument used for picking at growths, such as a lancet or scalpel]
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that growth from outside, and then cut with a sharp lancet the part you have grasped from those growths, until you know that all the flesh is removed; and if any cause remains from which an abscess is possible, then quickly remove it with one of the delicate instruments so that no cause remains (The author is describing how to surgically remove nasal tissue growth using sharp medical instruments) [Note: "extrat" may refer to extracting or removing the growth. "inscindeys" may refer to cutting or incising the growth with a sharp lancet. "estrumentz subtils" may refer to delicate medical instruments used for surgical procedures]
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is controlled by blood or occurs an abscess, then you should do what is necessary; or if it is a malignant abscess, then you should be cautious and cauterize that which has been cut so that all the caverns are cleared (The author is emphasizing the importance of being careful when treating nasal tissue growths, especially in cases where there is bleeding or an abscess) [Note: "sanc" may refer to blood. "apostema malignes" may refer to a type of abscess that is dangerous or harmful. "cauteriza" may refer to cauterizing or burning the affected area with a medical instrument, such as a hot iron]
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be placed in the nose after the incision with vinegar and water or wine (The author is describing how to use topical treatments such as vinegar, water, or wine to clean and disinfect the nasal passage after surgically removing tissue growths) [Note: "vi agre" may refer to vinegar. "getatz" may refer to placing or inserting. The use of medical treatments such as vinegar or wine was common in traditional medicine to clean wounds and prevent infection]
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and it processes moisture into the palate, then you know that it has healed (The author is describing how to recognize when the nasal passage has healed after surgically removing tissue growths) [Note: "ubert" may refer to being open or exposed. "procezeys" may refer to a process or function of the body. "humiditat" may refer to moisture or fluid in the nasal passage. The author is emphasizing the importance of observing the body's natural healing processes]
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh in the upper bones of the nose where incision has not reached (The author is describing how to recognize when nasal tissue growths have not been fully removed during surgical procedures) [Note: "penetra" may refer to penetrating or reaching. "osses de las nars" may refer to the bones in the nose. The author is emphasizing the importance of thoroughness when removing tissue growths]
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, it is necessary to insert a piece of liver from the one who has some swelling, and make small incisions, placing something between each stitch, such as a finger's width or less, and massage the patient and insert an end of the liver into their nostrils with a probe or any other means that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since that has been done, draw the scent towards the nostrils so that it reaches the nasal passages and is expelled over the patient's face, because many children in school do this action and it is an easy task for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two ends of the liver, one end protruding over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then administer flesh sutures with the stitches in the liver, and do this until you know that the flesh is attached to the stitches of the liver.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the liver, and place it in the nose with a small amount of bloodletting, and do this for three days or more until the corruption of all that is remaining from the flesh has been eliminated by the pus.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it has healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you find that drying is necessary during treatment, use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for nasal cleansing with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it from silver or iron, which resembles a small open lamp, similar to a small basin, and with the same shape.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the nasal cleansing instrument should be flat and open; it should have a handle in the back, with which you can hold it when you heat oil or any other liquid that you want to use from the extracts and causes that are suitable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal cleansing instruments are valuable: recipe for a mixture of beaver castoreum, white balm, ginger, saffron pilgrim, long pepper, asafetida, and spikenard each one unit. Mix it with juice of beet and cabbage, and make it into pills, and soak one pill in warm water, and put it in the patient's nostrils facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of teething in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	It is common for a teething to occur in the extremities of the nose, and it becomes enlarged and noticeable in certain days within which it requires careful monitoring.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore, it is necessary that you incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a hot compress or a burning medicine over the area where it was removed.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, then consider whether it has become stone-like, hard, with a dark color and little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with iron because it is a malignant abscess, as many have found great misfortune from attempting to incise this type of abscess.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a soft touch and not dark colored, and incision is possible in all cases, then evacuate the patient and make the incision without fear, and cure the area with drying and constricting substances until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, it does not require much intervention in the operation except in certain people. This passage suggests that the surgical procedure for repairing damage to cartilage, such as that found in the nose or ear, may not be necessary for all patients and should only be performed on certain individuals. The specific criteria for determining which patients require surgery is not mentioned in this text.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when dealing with some cause of this (dissolution of continuity), you should consider whether it is fresh plague with blood, and in that case, you should bring the two lips of the wound together with sutures and then cure it until it heals. This passage provides further guidance on the medical treatment for dissolution of continuity in cartilage, specifically in cases where it is caused by a fresh plague with blood. The recommended course of action includes bringing the edges of the wound together with sutures and then providing care until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the dissolution of continuity are already separated and each one is made whole, then it is necessary that you cut a piece from the end of each of its edges until blood comes out. This passage provides further instructions for medical treatment in cases where the lips of the wound have become separated and both sides have healed. The recommended course of action includes cutting a piece from the end of each edge of the wound until blood comes out, which will likely promote healing.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then bring the two lips together with sutures and constrict it, and over it powder dragon's blood and let it dry for three hundred days, and place over the powder a patch of emplastrum diaphoretic or any other consolidating plaster, and leave it on for two or three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it until the pus is cut off by itself, and then cure with ointment until it is healed. This passage provides a more detailed medical treatment for dissolution of continuity in cartilage. The recommended course of action includes bringing the edges of the wound together with sutures, constricting it, powdering dragon's blood over it, and applying a plaster to promote consolidation. The plaster should be left on for two or three days, after which it should be removed and replaced until the pus is eliminated by itself. Finally, ointment should be used to cure the wound until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the stomach, or bring the dissolution of continuity together with liver as I have shown you. This passage provides alternative methods for suturing the wound caused by dissolution of continuity in cartilage. The first method involves using needles to sew the wound back together, similar to how one would suture a stomach wound. The second method involves bringing the edges of the wound together with liver, which may be useful in cases where there is significant tissue loss or damage. The specific technique for doing so is not provided in this text.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in the inner parts. This passage discusses medical treatment for conditions where foreign objects or substances have become embedded in the inner parts of the lips. The recommended course of action includes extracting these foreign objects or substances using appropriate tools and techniques, as determined by the specific condition and individual patient. No further information is provided in this text.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	It is common for many people to develop hard abscesses similar to goose fat in the inner parts of their lips, some of which are smaller and some are larger. This passage describes a specific medical condition where hard abscesses or cysts form in the inner parts of the lips, resembling goose fat. The size of these abscesses can vary, with some being smaller and others being larger. No further information is provided in this text regarding treatment options or causes for this condition. [“Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.”
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary to bend the lips and open each of those hardenings from all sides, and then make an incision and fill the area with three times powdered wax until the blood has clotted, and then wash it with sour wine and cure the area with a styptic substance until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28:
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Chapter 28: On incising attached flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	It is common for many people to have flesh attached to the gums, which ancient doctors referred to as albulus. Therefore, it is necessary to suspend that with a lancet or hold it with forceps and make an incision along its length, and then allow the pus or blood to drain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply over the incision powdered wax or other styptic or desiccating powders. This passage recommends applying a styptic or desiccating powder, such as powdered wax, to the incision in order to promote healing and prevent further infection. The use of such powders is a common medical practice in order to control bleeding and speed up the healing process. By applying these powders to the incision, the risk of infection and other complications can be minimized, allowing for a faster and more comfortable recovery.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then make an incision again and cauterize it, because the cautery will not allow it to return. This passage recommends making a second incision and cauterizing the area in order to prevent the flesh from returning. The use of cautery is a common medical practice in order to seal off blood vessels and prevent further bleeding. By cauterizing the area, the risk of recurrence can be minimized, allowing for a more permanent solution to the problem of attached flesh in the gums.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29:
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Chapter 29: On removing teeth with iron instruments.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When there are rough, sharp protrusions on the surface of the inner and outer teeth, as well as between the gums, some of which are blackened and have become citrine or greenish in color, indicating that corruption has reached the gums and causing the teeth to loosen.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands and hold their head in your lap, and file down the teeth where those rough protrusions and similar causes are present until none remain, and do this for the blackened areas, the greenish areas, and all others until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if that is sufficient from the beginning of the treatment, then it is good; but if not, then you should repeat the treatment on those areas for another day and for the second and third days until it reaches the desired outcome. This passage emphasizes the importance of continuing the medical treatment described in the previous passage until the desired outcome has been achieved. If smoothing down rough or sharp protrusions on the surface of the teeth does not alleviate symptoms and promote healing within the first day, then the treatment should be repeated for several days until the desired outcome is reached. By continuing the treatment, medical practitioners can ensure that all causes of pain, discomfort, and infection are removed, allowing for proper oral hygiene and function.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require many types of rasps with various shapes, depending on the operation being performed. This passage highlights the importance of using appropriate tools and techniques when performing medical treatments on the teeth and gums. Different types of rasps or files may be required for different procedures, depending on the specific needs of each patient. By using the right tools and techniques, medical practitioners can ensure that treatments are effective and safe, minimizing the risk of complications or further damage to the teeth and gums. [Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so that you can tell the difference between the type of blade that is inside the tooth from the one that is between the teeth, according to their different shapes, and you should prepare these types of blades, which you will see shortly.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you treat the tooth for its pain with all care and take your time in its entire extraction, because there is no cause that can replace the loss of it once extracted, because it is a subtle substance that is concealed within, which makes up for the loss during the extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be absolutely certain which tooth is causing the pain, because often the pain deceives the patient and they think it's in a healthy tooth, and so you extract the wrong one and the pain doesn't stop until the truly diseased and painful tooth is extracted. This we have seen through the practice of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, how can you be sure which is the painful tooth, and when you know that, it is necessary to make an incision in the gum around the tooth with a scalpel that has some virtue (sharpness), until it is loosened from the gum all around, then use those tools mentioned earlier (i.e. forceps or delicate tweezers) gently and gradually until you extract it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply strong forceps or large tongs for good leverage or firm hold, and place the patient's head between your knees so that you have a firm grip and control, then pull the tooth gently along its axis in a straight line, making sure not to break it or cause the patient further pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not loose enough, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath it from all sides with ease and apply gentle pressure to loosen it, just as you did at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, then it is necessary to pack a piece of cloth around the break and secure it with a thin thread so that it does not break further during your manipulation with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary to operate carefully by making incisions in the gum around the entire tooth and be cautious not to break it off completely, but rather leave a portion attached, then return your attention to the patient because often the initial pain of the procedure is less than the subsequent pain that may follow.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and boldness during extractions without following our recommendations, because they often cause greater injuries and ailments that are more difficult to heal, and even extract additional teeth or bones from the jaw, as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the extraction, rinse the patient's mouth with wine (or vinegar) mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding after the procedure, as often occurs, then apply some powdered cinnamon and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs used to extract the tooth at the beginning should have a long handle, short grip, and be thick, so that they are not easily bent or deformed when in use.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And similarly, the forceps with a large grip should be strong enough that they are not easily bent or deformed when using them, and have short handles.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India, with straight handles and teeth at the ends that fit together to exert a strong force when squeezed, some have a shape like the beak of a bird called a stork (or crane), which provides a strong grip when used for extraction. [Remember, I am a machine learning model and my translations are not always perfect. They should be used as a guide and verified by a human expert if accuracy is important.]
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and removal of bones trapped in the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When it is necessary to extract a tooth that is fractured or has some remaining cause for attachment, then you should place a compress soaked in a mild irritant (such as tannin) on the area for one or two days until the tissue softens. Then, use forceps with handles resembling the beak of a stork (or crane), which are designed to grip and extract the tooth with precision.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of the forceps are made sharp, like a file or rasp. This allows for precise and controlled extraction of the tooth or bone fragment from the jaw.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If the tooth or bone fragment does not respond to your efforts using these forceps, then you must make an incision along the gum line and remove all of the tissue using a tool known as an "atale" (or lever), which has a small handle and is shaped like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short, thick handle that is not rounded or polished, so as to provide a secure grip and prevent slipping during use. This tool allows for precise manipulation and removal of the tooth or bone fragment from the jaw.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the gum tissue is loosened by using this tool, that's good. But if not, then you can use other instruments with these shapes: The first instrument has a triangular handle and a thick body to provide leverage and control during extraction.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument has a triangular shape with a thinner handle for more precise movements during extraction. This allows for greater control and flexibility when removing teeth or bone fragments from the jaw.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you can use this instrument, which has two curved edges or "ramps," as shown in the following diagram:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And also use these other instruments for dental scraping. The first one resembles a large "oncia" (ounce) and has the following shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The triangular end of this instrument should be curved or short and have some thickness, with a rough surface for scraping the tooth or bone fragment from the jaw. The end should not be polished to prevent slipping during use.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And remember that dental instruments are similar in many ways to other surgical tools. They can have different shapes and sizes depending on their intended use, but they all serve the same purpose of improving the accuracy and precision of medical procedures.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	However, skilled and experienced medical practitioners can create their own tools based on the specific needs of each operation and patient's condition. This is because there are many types of illnesses that ancient physicians did not know or address with specific instruments, due to the variety of different shapes and forms that surgical tools can take.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are fractured or dislocated, then it is important to treat this injury carefully with appropriate instruments and forceps, as described in the previous section on dental extraction. Additionally, you can use a paste made from herbs or medicinal powders to help heal the fracture and reduce pain and inflammation. The shape of this paste should be as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should have some thickness, gradually increasing in size, and be held in place with the mouth to prevent it from drying out or escaping until the bone is fully healed. After that, restore the area with appropriate medications or treatments.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then scrape away the debris and blackened areas of the break, and treat it until it heals completely.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapters were often numbered using Roman numerals)
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of prominent or protruding teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent or protruding beyond their natural shape, particularly in women and especially in young girls, it is necessary to consider the following: if the tooth does not overlap any other tooth and cannot be removed by cutting or filing, then root out that tooth with this instrument, which has a sharp point like a pig's snout and is made of iron from India.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make the incision carefully so as not to damage any other teeth or gum tissue. The cut should be deep enough to remove the tooth but not so deep as to cause further injury. This may take several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is important to avoid damaging surrounding teeth in the process.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the protruding tooth is exposed and can be filed down, then use a file made of iron from India with this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And the file should be made entirely of iron, with many small points like those on a needle-making awl, which can be used to gently and gradually file down the tooth over several days with ease, avoiding damage to other teeth or gums. This technique requires patience and precision, as it is important to remove only the excess material and not harm the surrounding tissues. The use of iron tools from India, valued for their strength and sharpness, ensures that the file will be effective in removing the unwanted protrusion while minimizing the risk of injury.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And finally, smooth the tooth with these rasps, and then use these razors to remove any remaining excess material.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If the tooth has a sharp edge that is causing pain or irritation to the tongue, then it is necessary to file down that edge until the roughness is removed and the area is smooth. This will prevent further injury to the tongue and ensure clear speech. Use a fine-grained file made of iron from India for this procedure, taking care not to remove too much material or damage the surrounding gum tissue.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver alloy fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are damaged by trauma, such as from impact or injury, and cannot be treated with medicinal remedies, it is necessary to use strong materials like gold alloys for repair. Gold alloys are preferred over silver alloys because they do not corrode or discolor over time. Silver alloys can tarnish and turn black, causing further damage to the tooth and surrounding gum tissue. Therefore, it is recommended to use gold alloys for dental fillings and repairs whenever possible, especially in cases where long-term durability and stability are important.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness as can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is to take the gold alloy and place twice as much as necessary between two healthy teeth, then curve or bend the alloy between two damaged teeth, whether it's one or several, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And apply the bandage again to the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom so that it is not poorly done.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your bandage, with which you strengthen the liver, should cover the roots of the teeth so that it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess parts of the liver with forceps or scissors, and place them in each location with care, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it as tight as Roman (garments).
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or torn, strengthen it with another liver in such a way throughout its duration.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as you sometimes see them arranged like this:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that one or two teeth return to their sockets in their places, and they have grown back as we have recommended, and they are painful.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a skilled and wise person should do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a cavity is filled with some pieces of cow bones, shaped like teeth, and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and secured as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament that is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is found below the tongue may be congenital or natural, present at birth, or it may develop as an accident and result from an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth with your head positioned at their feet; then raising their tongue and carefully cutting the ligament nerve according to its width, until the tongue is released from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or thickening due to scarring from an old injury, then you should inject a probe and cut through the thickness until you have completely severed the ligament and released the constriction.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care not to make a cut in the skin of the tongue, and that you cut only the ligament and avoid cutting any blood vessels, causing bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then rinse the wound from the incision with water or vinegar or warm water, and then place a soft ligament under the tongue; that is, a small piece of leather or cloth, to keep the patient's tongue from returning to its previous position so it does not become attached again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is bleeding, place a piece of vitriol trissat (a type of mineral) on the wound, and if the bleeding persists, cauterize the area with a red-hot iron called lantigo that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the wound with other remedies until it heals completely.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the removal of a ranula (a type of cyst) beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes beneath the tongue, there may be an abscess resembling a small nodule that restricts the tongue's ability to move naturally. It can easily grow and fill the entire mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure consists of opening the patient's mouth wide and examining the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is of a dark or black color and hard, and the patient cannot feel it, then do not touch it as it is likely cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it has turned white and is moist, then you should insert a probe into it and make an incision with a thin spatula, cutting it completely from all sides. And if bleeding occurs during the procedure, place a piece of vitriol trissat (a type of mineral) on top to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then continue working on it until you have completely removed it, rinse the area with a mixture of vinegar and salt, and treat it with other remedies as needed until it heals completely.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the removal of abscesses in both ears and those located in the ear canal, as well as other types of abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess forms in the ear canal and is made up of glands that resemble cotton, this is called the outer ear or "two ears". If these abscesses do not heal after using the methods described earlier, then you should consider whether they are hard, dark in color, and have little sensation. If so, do not touch them with a metal instrument.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	But if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with a metal instrument due to bleeding; instead, leave it alone until it matures, at which point you can either remove it or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	But if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin, then you should proceed with the incision.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure for removing an abscess consists of examining the area before beginning the operation to determine if it has rested sufficiently after being cauterized or if it has decreased in size. Then have the patient lie down facing the sun, position their head in your lap, and open their mouth wide. A servant should then hold the patient's tongue down with a noble instrument that has this shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and be as thin as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And when you press the instrument against the tongue and expose the abscess, place your finger over it to keep it in place, then insert a probe and place it in the abscess, and pull it outwards as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or if you are pulling any of the membranes, then use this type of instrument to make an incision:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the ends are curved so that the tips of each arm are facing each other and very sharp, made of iron that has been heated red-hot.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then use a spatula with this shape instead: It should be sharp on one end and blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made an incision in one side, make another incision on the other side using this same method of incision, and then clean the wound with warm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, use water from a decoction of elderberry bark or myrtle leaves and similar substances to stop the bleeding until it subsides. Then continue to care for the wound until it heals completely.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes other abscesses form in the ear canal besides those located in the outer ears, and these should be incised in the same way as described for two glands.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I once treated a woman who had an abscess in her ear canal that was black in color and had little sensation. The abscess had already closed off her ear canal, causing her to breathe with difficulty and restricting her food and water intake. She was on the brink of death if she had not received treatment within a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had been two months since it broke open through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I performed a fistulous procedure and introduced my finger into one of the holes, and pulled out a large piece from it, and then I made an incision in the other hole where I could reach, and forced open its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I introduced the probe into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut out a large portion of it (the abscess), and only a small amount of blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And so the abscess of that woman was healed, and she soon began to drink water and eat solid food. But I continued to incise the abscess many times over a long period, and pus flowed from it instead of blood, which continued until the abscess was completely drained.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I applied a dressing to it (the wound) and cauterized the area around it, thus concluding my treatment. And then I walked around and did not know what God had in store for me regarding this matter.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incising a swollen abscess.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrhal matter comes to the tonsils and they are swollen and long, then it is called perpendicular tonsilitis. But if it is thick and round at the bottom, then it is called a quinsy (abscess of the tonsils).
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with what we have said in the previous division (chapter), and you do not confirm your treatment, and it happens that the abscess has already drained on its own and become subtle, then it is necessary to incise the one that is round and aggregated; and if it is at the longitudinal part, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and not at the center, then it is necessary to attempt the incision with caution, for there is danger involved for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it (the tonsil) according to the manner that I have said, based on its whiteness and length, then you should make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument of the type used for this procedure, and place the probe in the new area and pull it downwards, and incise it with one of two instruments, as mentioned in the incision of double mellis (double-edged scalpel).
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary to incise only that part which is ripe according to the natural term without any addition, for if you incise beyond that, you will damage their ability to speak.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what I have recommended in the incision of double-edged scalpel, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is afraid of the incision, then it is necessary to use a dressing in the cauterization without causing fear. And the method of cauterization in this case is only with hot water, and you should place the head of the patient in your lap, and press their tongue with the instrument that I mentioned earlier, and take the water which I have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and pour it over the live coals, and hold it at a moderate thickness and not too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this. The shape of the instrument is as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the exterior of the concavity where the medicine is placed be like a cup's concavity, and place the instrument with the medicine over the tonsil, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not spill over the internal medicine, for none of it should fall on the wound and damage it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand with the medicine and press it over the tonsil for half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and numbed due to the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some lint and wrap it around the end of the probe, and submerge the lint in the medicine, and insert the probe with the lint into a cannula until the lint adheres to the cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the tonsil, and then leave it alone so that it dries out and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you find it necessary to repeat the medicine, then repeat it, and clean the area around the tonsil with a lint soaked in vinegar, and wipe it clean of any remaining medicine, and wash it with warm water, and cure it externally with embrocation (a liniment or lotion), and treat it internally with dressings until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safer than incision and longer due to fear (of pain).
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the tonsils are healed with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for they are cured with sublimation in this manner: take pennyroyal, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic scabious, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs, and mix all of these ingredients together in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar and boil them. And the pot should be well sealed with a proper seal, and there should be a hole at the top of the lid, over which an instrument with a concavity should be placed, made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the tip into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the tonsil and covers it, so that the tonsil becomes very clouded.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process many times until it dries out, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess (tonsillitis), for it would be too strong in the presence of an abscess, and you should not do that, but instead should treat the abscess cautiously.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not present with you, then take a reed and make a plug of egg white at the end of it, so that the patient's mouth is protected, for the egg white prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good and healthy.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and things that stick in the throat, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times things get stuck in the throat or a fish bone, or some other cause. [Note: This passage is referring to cases where foreign objects become lodged in the throat and need to be extracted.]
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you should extract what is visible and obvious, pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	But if something is not visible and is hidden in the throat, then you should make the patient vomit before their food has been digested in the stomach, because often the cause (of the obstruction) will be expelled from the throat by vomiting. Or have the patient swallow a piece of cabbage or lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and soak it with strong vinegar, and then have the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the location of the thorns, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and cover it with vinegar, then insert it into the mouth and let it slowly extract what is stuck in the throat. Or take a piece of leather and soak it in vinegar, and then gently insert it into the throat until the obstruction has been removed.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not forgotten by those causes which I mentioned, then an instrument of lead should be used in the following form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a finger, and at the end of it there should be a concavity that can easily be inserted into its throat (or mouth).
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And make its head (or top) lifted up, and be careful that it touches the bone of its throat, so that it reaches the body and removes whatever is stuck in the bone or spine, or even insert it with your hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But it would be better if the patient inserts it themselves, according to their knowledge of the location and cause, and they should push it down and then pull their hand with the instrument upwards, all depending on the amount that has been prepared before inserting it.[Corrected version: But it would be better if the patient inserts it themselves, according to their understanding of the location and cause, and they should push it downwards and then pull their hand with the instrument upwards, all depending on the quantity that has been prepared beforehand.]
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapters were often numbered using Roman numerals)
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a bloodsucker (leech) attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When a bloodsucker is treated with what we mentioned in the division of healing through medicines and not surgery, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after having examined their tongue with the instrument that we recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, then extract it gently with a small probe or fine tweezers appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a red-hot iron in the cannula's concavity, do this several times (until the bloodsucker dies and detaches from the throat) and make sure the patient abstains from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full bladder of warm water and put it in their mouth, rinse their mouth with it, and do not swallow any of the water but spit it out after an hour or so, as the bloodsucker will soon feel the warmth of the water and detach itself.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not expelled with what we recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinquefoil or asafoetida using the instrument that we recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this for four days. (Note: "cayra" is a variant spelling of "quaranta", meaning forty)
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another way of operating in the fumigation of it, which is to take a pot with burning coals in it and cover it with a cloth that has a hole in the middle where the end of the instrument can be inserted; then perform the fumigation from above; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, seal their mouth so that the fumigation is not expelled until you are sure that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, as the bloodsucker will soon detach itself.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not detach itself, then you should repeat the fumigation several times and make sure the patient abstains from drinking water, and consumes salty foods and garlic, and does not drink water; it is also necessary to follow this regimen until the bloodsucker has been expelled. [Corrected version: And if it does not detach itself, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, ensuring that the patient abstains from drinking water, eats salty foods and garlic, and avoids drinking water; it is also necessary to follow this regimen until the bloodsucker has been expelled.]
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat bloodsuckers in the throat when they are visible, and it resembles forceps but with a curve in it. (Note: In medieval medicine, surgical instruments were often made of metal or bone, and designed for specific purposes. The "forceps" mentioned here may have been similar to modern-day tweezers or hemostats.)
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which has a part that resembles a stork's beak and is curved, with the end sharpened by filing, so that when it compresses any cause (i.e., the bloodsucker), it does not let go. (Note: The description of the instrument suggests that it was designed to grip the bloodsucker securely without releasing it until it could be removed from the patient's throat.)
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40. (Note: In medieval manuscripts, chapters were often numbered using Roman numerals)
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse on abscesses and their division. (Note: The word "apostema" comes from the Greek word for "inflammation", and in medieval medicine it referred to a localized collection of pus in the body, often caused by infection or inflammation. Abscesses could occur in various parts of the body and were considered serious medical conditions.)
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of many kinds and types, according to their appearance, each one is described in this book. (Note: Medieval medical texts often classified diseases into various categories or "kinds" based on their symptoms, causes, and other factors. This allowed physicians and surgeons to diagnose and treat diseases more effectively.)[Corrected version: Abscesses are of many kinds and types, as will be remembered from each one described in this book.]
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their penetration and division in two ways: one is according to the type of abscess itself, and the other is due to the nature of the humors (i.e., bodily fluids). (Note: In medieval medicine, the body was believed to be made up of four "humors" or bodily fluids: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. These humors were thought to influence a person's health, temperament, and appearance, and imbalances in them could lead to disease.) [Corrected version: And abscesses are diverse in their penetration and division in two ways: one is according to the type of abscess itself; and another is due to the nature of the humors (i.e., bodily fluids).]
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the location in which they occur in the body, as an abscess occurring in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from one that occurs in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery. (Note: The location of a disease or condition was considered an important factor in medieval medicine, as it could indicate the type of humoral imbalance or other cause involved. This information would then be used to determine the appropriate course of treatment.) [Corrected version: And the second way is according to the locations in which they occur in the body, as the abscess occurring in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from one that occurs in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery.]
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that must not be pierced but rather allowed to mature and heal on their own. (Note: Medieval surgeons would often use various techniques to encourage the pus in an abscess to drain, such as incision or lancing. However, in some cases, they may have chosen to wait for the abscess to mature and heal on its own, depending on the location, size, and severity of the abscess.) [Corrected version: And there are certain abscesses that must not be pierced but rather allowed to mature and reach a conclusion (i.e., healing) in them.]
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other abscesses that must be pierced when they are hard and not matured according to their course, such as abscesses that are near joints, for when an abscess is close to a joint, its duration is prolonged until it affects the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or if the abscess is near a major organ, and if you delay piercing it until it matures, it may harm the main organ; or if it is near the buttocks, then it should be pierced before it matures; and it is not advisable to pierce an abscess that is not fully ripe and hard, except for one that is near the buttocks, so as not to cause a prolapse of it and extend it to the internal parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula or incomplete healing. (Note: The text suggests that medieval surgeons would have used their clinical judgment to determine when an abscess should be pierced and drained, taking into account factors such as its location, size, severity, and stage of development.)[Corrected version: And there are other abscesses that must be pierced when they are hard and not matured according to their course, such as those near joints. For when an abscess is near a joint, its duration is prolonged until it affects the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or if the abscess is near a major organ, and if you delay piercing it until it matures, it may harm the main organ; or if it is near the buttocks, then it should be pierced before it matures. It is not advisable to pierce an abscess that is not fully ripe and hard, except for one that is near the buttocks, so as not to cause a prolapse of it and extend it to the internal parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula or incomplete healing.]
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And it is necessary that you know the time for piercing the abscess, and that is when it has matured. (Note: The text emphasizes the importance of timing in surgical procedures such as piercing an abscess, as doing so too early or too late can have negative consequences for the patient.)[Corrected version: And it is necessary that you know the time for piercing the abscess, which is when it has matured.]
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and also a decrease in redness and swelling, as well as the hardness of the abscess and other signs. (Note: The text lists several signs that indicate an abscess has matured and is ready to be pierced, such as decreased pain, fever, redness, and swelling, as well as a decrease in the firmness or hardness of the abscess. These signs would have helped medieval surgeons determine when it was safe to pierce the abscess and allow its contents to drain.) [Corrected version: And know that it is mature when there is a cessation of pain and fever, as well as a decrease in redness, swelling, and hardness of the abscess, along with other signs.]
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And it is necessary that you know that the incision should be made lower than the abscess and away from the point where the pus will flow after healing of the eminence (i.e., elevated area). (Note: The text advises against making the incision directly over the abscess or in a location where the pus may collect after healing, as this can lead to further complications and delayed recovery.) [Corrected version: And it is necessary that you know that the incision should be made below the abscess and away from the point where the pus will flow after healing of the eminence (i.e., elevated area).]
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the incision should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the regions of the ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection (i.e., folds or creases); for in those that are reflected, use incision according to the member (i.e., tailor it to the specific location). (Note: The text advises against making incisions across the natural lines of the body, such as joints, folds, and creases, as this can lead to further complications and delayed healing. Instead, surgeons should make incisions parallel to these lines in order to minimize trauma and promote healing.) [Corrected version: And the incision should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in regions of ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection (i.e., folds or creases). For those that are reflected, use incision according to the member (i.e., tailor it to the specific location).]
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to leave the incision until the digestion of it has been confirmed according to its course (i.e., allowed to mature fully), as we have said; for if you pierce it beforehand, there will be prolongation of its contents and much dirt, and soon the lips of the wound become hardened and deepen. (Note: The text emphasizes the importance of waiting for an abscess to fully mature before attempting to drain or incise it, in order to minimize the risk of infection and promote healing.) [Corrected version: But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to leave the incision until the digestion (i.e., maturation) of it has been confirmed according to its course (i.e., allowed to mature fully), as we have said; for if you pierce it beforehand, there will be prolongation of its contents and much dirt, and soon the edges of the wound become hardened and deepen.]
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses must be pierced according to the width of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to what the member requires (i.e., the specific needs of the affected area). (Note: The text recognizes that there may be situations where an abscess needs to be pierced before it has fully matured, such as when it is causing significant pain, impeding function, or poses a risk of infection or other complications.) [Corrected version: But some abscesses must be pierced according to the width of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to what the affected member requires.]
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to perform a small incision in small abscesses and a large and wide incision or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses. (Note: The text advises that the size and number of incisions should be tailored to the specific needs of each abscess, with larger and more extensive incisions used for larger and more severe abscesses.) [Corrected version: And it is necessary to perform a small incision in small abscesses and a large and wide incision or many sections according to the diversity of sizes of the abscesses.]
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other abscesses where it is necessary that the cavity be concave and open when it has formed in such a way as bread and has been made in time that it is already established, just as one that occurs in the groin or in the buboes (i.e., swollen lymph nodes). (Note: The text suggests that some abscesses may require surgical intervention to create an opening or cavity for drainage, especially if they are large, deep-seated, or located in areas with thick layers of tissue.) [Corrected version: And there are other abscesses where it is necessary that the cavity be concave and opened when it has formed in such a way as bread and has been made in time that it is already established, just as one that occurs in the groin or in the buboes (i.e., swollen lymph nodes).]
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are some that are incised with a section having three angles; and these are those where the incision is made in such a way as the shape of a myrtle leaf, just as in abscesses of athletes (i.e., boils or abscesses caused by strenuous exercise or friction). (Note: The text suggests that certain types of abscesses may require specific incision techniques to promote optimal drainage and healing, such as creating a triangular or myrtle-leaf shaped opening.) [Corrected version: And there are some that are incised with a section having three angles; and these are those where the incision is made in such a way as the shape of a myrtle leaf, just as in abscesses of athletes (i.e., boils or abscesses caused by strenuous exercise or friction).] [Continued in Part 3...]
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those where a round section or crescent-shaped incision is performed, similar to these. (Note: The text indicates that certain types of abscesses may require specific shapes and sizes of incisions to optimize drainage and promote healing.) [Corrected version: And there are some in which a round or crescent-shaped incision is performed, similar to these.]
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	If the one who has such a thing that is not like deep-seated abscesses, but rather superficial abscesses or boils, it is necessary that you lance it with a shallow, or flat, incision.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has already gathered pus, that you lance it and do not be afraid to drain only part of the pus at that time; after draining some of the pus, return the next day to fill the abscess with poultices, and then drain a larger portion, and do this many times until the abscess is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is of a frail constitution, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an elderly person in a weakened state, for the vital spirit often dissipates with the evacuation of pus and the patient can quickly take a turn for the worse. Therefore, be cautious in your treatment.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Pay close attention to this chapter and consider carefully the incision you make when lancing these abscesses. If the surface of the abscess is small or flat, then apply a few leeches or use a medicinal paste. But if the abscess is large and the incisions are numerous, then it is necessary to place a wick in each opening so that they can all drain together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If a piece of the skin around the abscess has been cut off or if it has become concave in shape, then it is necessary to pack the wound with dry cloth or thread made from linen, like when you dress wounds or cuts that are not wet. Strengthen this packing over the course of three days and continue the treatment until the wound is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is a flow of blood during your treatment, then apply cold water and vinegar compresses to the area, changing them frequently. This will help stop the bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and use powders that I have recommended in various parts of this book, depending on the situation.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if the abscess is located in an area with many nerves and it is wintertime, then it is necessary to apply poultices made of vinegar and heated oil to the area. This will help alleviate any pain or discomfort caused by the cold weather.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	But if it is summer and the area around the abscess is fleshy, then it is necessary to apply poultices made with water and oil or vinegar and oil, changing them frequently over the course of three days. Then you should open the abscess, clean the wound, and administer treatment as needed until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is the knowledge that is necessary for the treatment of abscesses in general, but as I have already said, each type of abscess requires a specific approach to healing, which I will discuss further in individual chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Chapter 41: On the treatment of abscesses that appear on the scalp.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the scalp, there are small abscesses that resemble knots and have their own outer coverings. These abscesses can take many forms.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And these small abscesses have heads, or tips, and they may contain fluid that resembles lime in texture.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some of these abscesses contain fluid that resembles powder or sand, while others are hard and stonelike in texture. [Continued in the next message... ]
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in general, and in the treatment of all of these types of abscesses, there is no cause for concern. This is because the lancing of the abscess will not create any unwanted tension or resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation for lancing these abscesses involves using an instrument called an "entromes" to probe them until you are certain that they have been fully opened and drained.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if the abscess contains fluid, then you should make an incision along its length in a surface cut according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin the incision at point B and continue along the line to point G, where the fluid is contained. Once the fluid has been drained, be sure to excise the entire area that contained it, leaving no remnants or residue behind, as any remaining tissue could become infected or cause further complications.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then apply a poultice of Egyptian cotton if it is available, or else use a mixture of water and salt. Cover the wound with this poultice and leave it on for a day, as this will help dissolve any remaining tissue from the abscess wall.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a poultice of Egyptian cotton again if necessary, repeating the process two more times until you are confident that all remaining tissue from the abscess wall has been dissolved. Once this is achieved, continue to treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is fully healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If the abscess contains hard or fatty nodes, then you should make an incision according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a cross-shaped incision, making one inch-long cut between the two lips of the incision and then cutting through all layers of tissue until you reach the outermost layer or "tunic" of the abscess. Use your strength to extract this outermost layer, which contains the infected material.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your hand or arm becomes tired or resists the incision, then do what I have told you to do previously.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, proceed with incision and treatment of the stony abscess according to what I have told you; and when incising a stony abscess, be aware that it is easier to cut through, as it contains little blood and fluid.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some times there are boils of this kind that are in the head in some men, with whom there is not too much moisture; this happens because bile has solidified on a boil in the head of an old woman, and the boil appears as hard as a stone, rough, white, which cannot be punctured, and if anyone strikes it with force, they would be harmed.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other boils that occur in the head, this is not the case, such as the boils that appear in children's heads near the ears, but the section of these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make an incision in those that are lower down on them, so that the body is relieved of the pus in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat those with what is appropriate for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas, which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Often these boils occur in the neck and armpits and groins, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are mostly generated between them, and every scrofula of these is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and boils of the head, as we have said.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofulas are many, for some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in the one that you see of good disposition in touch, whose color, which is visible, is similar to the color of the skin, and is healthy all around, and not connected to the neck nerve, nor veins, nor arteries, and not prominent, it is necessary that you make an incision in this one with a dry superficial cut, from above the body part to below, along the line of G to the line of B, and peel off all sides, and extend two lips of the skin with an ounce or several ounces if necessary for those, as we have said in the boils of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve should not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the spatula should not be too sharp, so that it does not fit your hand with incision, or disturb the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to incise a vein or artery, you would prohibit yourself from the operation, then stop at the wound with vitriol trissat or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave it in place until the acuteness of the boil subsides and the wound softens and begins to become purulent.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is stopped.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then ask with your skilled judgment if there are any other small scrofulas present, and if so, incise those and clean them out.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is necessary then not to incise that scrofula from its base.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that, you must ligate it with strong bile and leave it in place until it falls out by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire scrofula, it is necessary then to bring the two lips of the wound together and suture them as soon as possible before any excess remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess remaining due to the large size of the scrofula, it is necessary then to pay attention to incising its root, and remove it and provide suture and what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those scrofulas that contain moisture, perforate them with superficial incisions at the point of their maturation, and stop the incision where it dries up the pus in the lower part of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And provide incision, hot compresses with ointment and similar things for that, so that it dissolves what has remained of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already cleaned, it is necessary then to treat it with flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pilonidal abscess located in the gluteal fold. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal\_sinus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal_sinus)
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this incision "epilhon", and I have not seen any person in our land who has done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the title of the chapter about that.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with sciatica, it is necessary to avoid extracting the pilonidal abscess, because it does not provide any benefit due to the fact that all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have boils in the mouth or buttock cleft or two ears, when the illness is not in the spine, it is necessary to avoid incising the pilonidal abscess, as this can cause the danger that results from penetration.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore it is necessary when we want that, to incise the pilonidal abscess below three circles of the pilonidal abscess, or four with a small incision along the length in the one that is between two circles by amount, so that the incision is even, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision, because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of blood from it are loose.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the gluteal fold with an ounce and then make an incision in the skin until reaching the canal, but avoid blood vessels for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the lips as we have said, and it is indicated on the incision of the canal by the flame which comes out from it due to its breakage and the removal of the cyst.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time comes when incision is feared, add two lips of the skin to the wound, and suture only on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medications that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And it is said by Albucasis that the essence of what we have discussed, the explanation is nothing but to see that some of these boils have filled the gluteal fold of the patient and the patient has died and their intestines are trapped, and some want to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound for some breath and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, I command leaving the wound open until the wickedness of the illness is consumed; and the wickedness of it lasts for three days; and therefore I command covering the wound in this way and treating it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen myself practicing as a physician is that a maid took a knife and inserted it in her own throat, cutting part of the cartilage of the trachea, and I was called to cure her, and I found her moaning like the dying, and I discovered the wound and found the blood which was flowing out of the wound a little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I confessed that she had not cut a vein or artery, but the air was escaping from the wound, and I cured her until she was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it did not harm the maid, but only affected her voice, and after several days she returned to her normal condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the treatment of abscesses there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the throat externally, and is called a cervical hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called a cervical hernia, is a large abscess according to the complexion of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can occur in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case can occur in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by a blockage of an artery, and this last case is dangerous.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not be presumptuous in treating it with surgery unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe and examine it with the finger, and if it resembles a fatty node and is not suspended by any veins, then you should incise it in the same way as nodes and extract it along with its contents from the skin and bursa; but if not, then the entire area must be examined thoroughly, and the wound should be treated appropriately until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the classification of different types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many types of large nodes, and I have already mentioned all their varieties in the previous section.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	It is important to distinguish between a node and an abscess with uncertainty.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain until the boiling of the excess material subsides, and it is a complete putrefaction that ultimately stops the fever, pain, and warmth.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in the case of a node, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains only fluid like a lemon at its own place.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And the color of a node depends on the complexion of the body, and its beginning is like a goiter, and it forms in the same way as a cyst, whether large or small, and there are two types of nodes: those that contain fat and moisture, and the colors of the fluid vary, as I mentioned in the previous chapter.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when treating a node, it is important to express the fluid and examine it at the beginning using an instrument called a probe, as described in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of examination for abscesses and all types of swellings: you take this probe and insert it into the most humid part of the abscess or swelling that you find, and then gently rotate the probe, little by little, until you are certain that it has penetrated through the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand over the abscess according to its size, and then carefully remove the probe and observe what has been expressed from it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the fluid has been expelled and is flowing out, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial cut, as I have mentioned in other cases of abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no fluid on the surface of the probe, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry the area with a superficial incision in the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	In this way, as you have been taught, apply ligatures to the wound and carefully remove the skin from all sides, preserving the membrane or sac if possible, and then extract the fatty tissue along with the swelling.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if the swelling is ruptured during the operation, it will not be possible to extract any healthy tissue, and in many cases this leads to complications. Therefore, you should remove as much of the damaged tissue as possible until there is no further cause for concern.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if any residual material remains, whether little or too much, the swelling will return, according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small portion of the swelling remains, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the area, placing a cauterizing agent on the site of the abscess, and treat it with other appropriate treatments until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the swelling is large, then you should suture its two lips and treat it with dressing that promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is a pulsating vein in opposition to the swelling, or if it is non-pulsating, then you should apply a poultice made with quicklime, which contains vitriol, and leave it in place for two or three days until the wound can be safely reopened and the boiling of the blood subsides. Then proceed to incise the swelling again.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for incision and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	There are three types of probes, which vary in size from large to medium to small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of the large probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The shape of the medium probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The shape of the small probe is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aloe wood, or with curved handles that fit well in the hand, allowing for quick insertion into abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels, which are named alberedes, and one type is called a berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The method of experiencing a great illness, find its cure:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The method of experiencing milder symptoms, find its remedy:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The method of experiencing less, find its cure:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is appropriate that they are for those abscesses, ulcers, fistulas and buboes because of the presence between the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And round, large, and broad leeches are used, similar to large needles with which sails are sewn, they are made of earthenware from citron trees, or of iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of earthenware from citron trees.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And there are the experiences with black feathers, which remind one that through these (feathers) openings or fistulas in the cavity of which are reflections, should be reflected with their lightness by those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three types: some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Method of experiencing a great illness with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Method of experiencing milder symptoms with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Method of experiencing lesser symptoms with lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ulcers are of many types, for some are simple ulcers with only one curve, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their unhealthy humors, and these are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those unhealthy humors, they have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them, some have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all those (humors) are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of a single large humor, like this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of a single medium-sized humor, like this:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a single small humor, like this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of a large unhealthy humor, like this:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a medium-sized unhealthy humor, like this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of a small unhealthy humor, like this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a large humor with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of a medium-sized humor with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of a small humor with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a large humor with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a medium-sized humor with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of a small humor with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels used to cut and remove swollen lymph nodes and abscesses, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those (instruments) that are used to make incisions are sharp and the others are not sharp, and they should not be placed in such a manner, but rather for making a benefit during the removal of nodes, so as to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and through their use the patient can be healed and find some relief from the inflammation that arises from the removal of an abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of almagates (medicinal pastes), and they come in three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of the large almagate:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of the medium almagate:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of the small almagate:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	There are also methods for making clay (or similar substances) that are similar to those used in the production of alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the end of the instrument that has been pierced with a sharp point and hidden inside, and from which flows liquid both internally and externally, whenever you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the teeth during the piercing of abscesses and are not noticed by the patients, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the shapes of those (instruments).
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of leeches used to cut off the flow of blood, and they come in three types; large, medium, and small; the shapes of them are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	There are also methods for making clay (or similar substances) that are round and somewhat elongated, and they are fine (thin or delicate).
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these types of cups be of different sizes, large, medium, and small, so that through them you can release flows of blood with speed when necessary, and at first, when there is no medication.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to draw blood from every part of the body, but only from fleshy parts, such as the fleshy areas of the legs and thighs, the upper arms, breasts, stomach, and groin, and similar places where there is plenty of flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes it is necessary to use other small instruments similar to syringes of this form, through which blood can be drawn when making an incision for phlebotomy or opening a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in the following form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts, which resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes, the breasts of some men become swollen due to excessive sleep, and they become enlarged like women's breasts do when they begin to lactate, or in cases of Roman fever (malarial fever), which is far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who suffer from this, it is necessary to make an incision in the shape of a crescent moon along the line between B and G, remove all the thickened tissue, apply carmine-based medication on the wound, suture the two lips of the wound together, and ensure that the inside is clean before it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags downwards and becomes soft like that of a woman, then it should be cut in half along its upper parts with two crescent-shaped incisions, each one contained within the other until the larger one contains the smaller one, as shown in this diagram between B and G. Then remove the tissue from between the two lips of the wound, drain any pus, apply medication, suture the wound, and administer any necessary powder or ointment during the healing process until it heals completely.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not make the necessary incision due to the patient's discomfort or excessive bleeding, then it is necessary to apply a compress of dry, absorbent material soaked in corrosive ointment and allow it to dissolve any remaining tissue until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the puncturing of abscesses that arise in the lower region of the body due to itching.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that arise in the lower region of the body due to itching are a type of scrofula, hard and covered with thick skin.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of these abscesses contain fluid, and in such cases, it is necessary to make a crescent-shaped incision along the line between G and B. Once all the pus has been drained from the abscess, pack it with dry material and leave it alone for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then apply appropriate ointment to the packing material and dress the wound until it heals completely.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is in the form of a lymph node or a scrofula, then cut it open as I have described for scrofulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extensive and there is a risk of gangrene, then apply cautery as I have described before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses caused by veins or arteries.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the surrounding tissue has hardened, it often results in abscesses. Some signs that indicate the inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein include: firstly, when the abscess caused by an artery is long and located near the heart; secondly, when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you can hear a stridor (a harsh, blowing sound).
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And abscess caused by a vein is round and apparent on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Incision on such abscesses is risky, especially in areas like the armpits, groin, and neck, where large blood vessels are located. In cases of very large abscesses, it is advisable to avoid surgical treatment altogether. Similarly, abscesses located in the extremities or on the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	However, for abscesses caused by inflammation of the orifice of an artery, make a long incision in the surrounding tissue and use forceps to widen the incision and expose the artery, removing its outer layers until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place a needle over the incision and insert it into the other layer, and tie off the artery with double-stranded suture in two places – this causes ischemia (lack of blood flow) and facilitates the extraction of two arteries that are found only in temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply pressure to the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is drained and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to prevent gangrene from developing in the area, and dress the wound with appropriate ointments until it heals completely.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is caused by incision of a vein, then hold the area with your hand as close to the abscess as possible and insert the needle below the area you are holding. Then use double-stranded thread to pull out the contents from the other side, and tie off the abscess using a strong ligament in a figure-eight pattern, as I have previously described for grape ligatures with two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you are concerned about pulling out the thread, then insert a suture needle below the entire abscess along the incision line and tighten the sutures in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then drain the abscess by pressing it gently from the middle towards the incision site until all the pus is released, and then use scissors to cut away any excess tissue that remains attached to the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place a pad soaked in wine and oil on top of the wound, and administer treatment using warm compresses and ointments until it heals completely.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter L (50) on abscess caused by nerve injury.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, similar abscesses can also develop in nerves when there is injury or excessive strain on them.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	This type of abscess is most commonly found in the areas around joints, such as the ankles or wrists, or anywhere where joints are prone to injury.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	This type of abscess is severe and has the same color as other parts of the body. It tends to form in large clusters and can cause a state of stupor when it compresses surrounding tissues with great force.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	Unlike other types of abscesses that form near the heart, this type is located away from the heart and does not extend forward or backward. Instead, it spreads in all directions.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is not advisable to treat this type of abscess with surgical incision because it can easily lead to contracture (scarring or stiffening of the surrounding tissues).
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	However, if the abscess is located on the head or forehead, then it can be treated by draining it with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then extract it using forceps and make an incision with scissors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the abscess is large, then suspend it using hooks and remove any surrounding tissue that appears necrotic or dead. Then pack the wound with appropriate dressing material and close it using surgical sutures until it heals completely.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of abscesses that occur on the belly caused by hernia (cheil).
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	The growths that appear on the bellies of some people and on other parts of their bodies are called fungal because they resemble fungi; these have a subtle nature and a large head, and their lips are inverted; some are small, while others are greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two parts that resembled large fungi, and there was no difference between them in whiteness, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those parts were turned inside out and split open, and there was always moisture flowing from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised those parts and found in one of them a piece that weighed 18 ounces. And the other one weighed 5 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if their flesh is white, moist, and of subtle size; then you incise with a broad spatula, and have cauteries present at the fire, because much matter must be expelled from the section of it, and if blood comes, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is poor and fearful, be careful not to incise with iron; but instead take fresh lead filings, and strengthen their flesh in this way, which we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then apply the lead filings to the constriction; and do not stop strengthening the large wound of the flesh until it is cut off and falls by itself without trouble.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wound is of large size, then there is some cause for fear and dread in the incision of it, especially in one that is on the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you incise the majority of it and then cauterize that part so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And take care of it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise a wound that is of dark color, with little feeling, and with little regard for it, because that is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come with a reminder of cancer in this regard.
Capitol .lii.	Capital LII (52)
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Treatment for a protruding navel (umbilical hernia)
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The protrusion of the navel (umbilical hernia) can be caused by several factors, such as ruptures in the cipha (a membrane above the belly button), which cause the skin or intestine to bulge out, just as it happens with other ruptures. It can also be caused by blood that flows from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned, or by constricted windiness in the navel.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is caused by a rupture in the cipha and the emergence of the skin or intestine, then the color of the abscess will be similar to the color of the body; it will not be painful, and its appearance will vary depending on the location.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	But if it is caused by the emergence of the intestine, then its appearance will be similar to what we have described before, but with even greater diversity, and when you press on it with your fingers, it will hide, and then return; it can easily go back in, but it becomes greatly swollen and painful when it is near a bath or there is much work involved.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is caused by moisture, then it is not painful and does not hide when you press on it with your hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	But if it is caused by blood, then the abscess will appear with darkened coloration.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is caused by flesh that has hardened and thickened, then the abscess will be serious, large, and hard, and its size will be fixed.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is caused by windiness (gas), then touching it will not cause any pain.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation for this condition is that you consider whether the protrusion of the navel is caused by blood from an artery or a vein, or by windiness (gas); in that case, you must refrain from treating it because, as we have taught you in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins, there is danger and fear involved.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the protrusion of the navel is caused by the intestines or the skin, then you must command the patient to hold their belly, and stand with their legs apart; then you should mark the circumference of the entire navel with a probe, and command them to lie face down between your hands on their stomach, and then encircle the circumference of the navel with a broad spatula at the location that you have marked with the probe; and then extend the swelling towards the surrounding areas using large hooks; and finally bind it in the circumference with strong thread or cord in an appropriate manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then place the middle of the swelling on the ligature and insert your finger into that location, and search for the intestine; if you have found it and held it with the ligature, then you can pull gently and push the intestines back inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin or tissue, then take it with forceps and incise any excess that may be present.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then you should encircle that area and return to your operation; and take two needles and place strong sutures on them, then insert the two needles into the circumference that you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, and pull the sutures tight to draw the swelling in four directions.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area alone until the flesh has retracted and falls by itself; or you can incise it when it has become thinner and softer, and then take care of it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is caused by hardened flesh or moisture, then you should evacuate the abscess as we have described, removing the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then take care of it with appropriate treatments to strengthen the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capital LIII (53)
De curacio de cranc.	Treatment for cancer (crab)
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already spoken in the division about the type of cancer and how it should be treated with medicines, that it is advisable to treat cancer with medicines rather than iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that cancer generated in the marrow requires great caution in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a location where it is possible to extract it, such as a cancer that is in the breasts or in the thigh, and similarly on members that can be removed entirely, and especially when it is beginning and small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, it is not appropriate to attempt to treat it, because I cannot heal such cancer nor have I seen anyone else who has, nor has anyone reached a cure for it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it, when it is located as we have said, is that you proceed and bleed the patient, purging them of black bile several times, and let their blood if there is clear congestion present.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient with a preparation for the operation, and prohibit them from eating any food that could obstruct the surgery; and cleanly make an incision all around with good cautery, ensuring that there remains no cause of infection in it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not close the wound lightly, and press on the areas, and clean away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is against your will to have thick blood flow from an incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and treat the wound with another remedy until it has healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 50. (based on the context)
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	As we have previously mentioned in the division, of the different types of dropsy and their symptoms, we will now discuss the treatment of it with medicines. (Note: I translated "species" as "types" and "senhals" as "symptoms" based on context)
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type of dropsy that is cured with iron is only the type of ascites, and it should not be approached with iron for the types of tympanites nor for the type of hydrothorax, because that is deadly. (Note: I translated "ferr" as "iron" based on context and prior knowledge)
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of dropsy tympanites with medicines and do not see an improvement in the patient's condition, then consider, because if the patient is already weakened or has another illness along with this dropsy, such as cough or abdominal pain, then be careful to not treat them with iron, because it is dangerous. (Note: I translated "comfereys" as "see an improvement" based on context and prior knowledge)
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see that the patient is in good health and has no other illness but only dropsy, and they are neither infants nor elderly, then the method of operation for them is to lift the patient between your hands and have them expel the air from their stomach with their hand, push the water towards the lower part of their abdomen, and then take a piece of spongy material in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	should be two-sided with pointed ends like a sponge, but have some small thickness gradually, in order to avoid penetrating the intestine during the operation and causing harm to it. (Note: I translated "passes entro" as "penetrate" based on context)
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, because in that case, you must make the incision at a distance of three fingers downwards towards the lower abdomen, to the right of the navel. (Note: I translated "seccio" as "incision" based on context)
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is due to a liver illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers. (Note: I translated "fietge" as "liver" based on context)
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to the spleen, then your incision should be to the right. (Note: I translated "melsa" as "spleen" based on context)
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not appropriate for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie, because then the excess fluid may run to that weak area. (Note: I translated "superfluitatz" as "excess fluid" based on context)
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the entire abdominal wall with an instrument, and enter that incision, and lift your hand with the sponge between the abdominal wall and the peritoneum, and extract what you can; it should be about the size of a fingernail or thereabouts. (Note: I translated "siphac" as "peritoneum" based on context)
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the peritoneum until the sponge reaches the empty space, which is where the water is. (Note: I translated "ciphac" as "peritoneum" and "loc vuoyt" as "empty space" based on context)
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or lead, with a small hole at the bottom, and on both sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its end is sharpened like a feather quill, as you see. (Note: I translated "canula" as "cannula" based on context)
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the highest end of it is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, that will immediately rise to cover the instrument, and thus the water can be evacuated in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than necessary at once, then the patient may die quickly due to loss of their animal spirit, or they may develop a five-day fever which is close to death. (Note: I translated "armilla" as "stopper" based on context and prior knowledge, "sieu spirit animal" as "animal spirit", and "cincopi" as "five-day fever")
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate according to the strength of the patient and according to what their physical signs indicate to you, such as the quality of their pulse and their overall health. (Note: I translated "vertut" as "strength", "disposicios" as "physical signs", "bontat" as "health", and "pols" as "pulse")
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused by the abdominal wall that immediately retains the hole on the peritoneum, as I have previously instructed you to pierce it in this way. (Note: I translated "ciphac" as "peritoneum")
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then insert the instrument again on the following day if you see that the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to leave too much water in the body. (Note: I translated "jorns" as "days", "tolerant" as "tolerates", and "error" as "mistake")
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are concerned about the patient's health, and you leave a large quantity of water, then treat it with hot sand burial, and use suction in baths, and expose the patient to the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed. (Note: I translated "sepultura en arena cauda" as "hot sand burial", based on context)
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize above the stomach, and the spleen and liver during the evacuation of water, as I have described earlier in what comes before. (Note: I translated "cauteriza" as "cauterize", "stomac" as "stomach", "melsa" as "spleen", and "fitge" as "liver")
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55 (based on context)
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated genital openings. (Note: I translated "locs" as "openings")
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some children are born from their mother's womb and the head of their genital opening is not perforated (or it is narrow or not in its proper place). (Note: I translated "cap de la sua mixtio" as "head of the genital opening")[/
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to pierce it with perforation as soon as it is born with a very fine instrument in this way: (Note: I translated "perforacio" as "perforation", "spatum" as "instrument", and "mot subtil" as "very fine")
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a thin nail of lead into the hole and tie it there for three or four days. (Note: I translated "clavil" as "nail", "plom" as "lead", "per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre" as "for three or four days")
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the child shows signs of wanting to urinate and starts to dribble, then remove it. (Note: I translated "remaugut" as "shows signs", "hurine" as "starts to dribble")
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine flowing over the area will not be able to pass through the hole. (Note: I translated "claure" as "pass through")
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the child's opening is narrow, they should be treated with a lead nail for many days until it becomes wider. (Note: I translated "trops" as "many")
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But in cases where the opening is not in its proper location, it is necessary to correct it by moving the foreskin to the tip of the penis so that the child can urinate properly and the sperm can reach the mother during intercourse, as this condition can cause infertility. (Note: I translated "vergua" as "penis", "mayre" as "mother", "rectitut" as "properly", "laga" as "serious")
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation in this case is that the patient should be positioned face down, and you should extend the head of the patient's penis with your left hand using strong traction, and make a incision at the tip of the penis's foreskin with a sharp spatula, similar to an inkwell or without cutting any part, so that the inside of the foreskin resembles the head of the penis and the foreskin falls in the middle as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for bleeding, as it often happens; and place yourself at the site where you are cutting the blood vessel, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 46.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of albater, which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of corruption, darkness and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often, this albater (balanitis) occurs on the penis and is characterized by an eminence of flesh that appears.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one type is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	In the case of non-malignant cases, it is advised to use fine hooks and remove the affected area until all is cleaned out, then place a cotton swab soaked in Egyptian ointment over the wound; and apply this remedy until the wound heals completely.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albater (balanitis) is malignant and of a dark color, then it is advised to use cautery near the incision and cutting of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the albater (balanitis) is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis and one part of it is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then it is advised to remove the albater that is inside first, until it becomes solidified; and then cure the area outside, because if you try to cure both at the same time with the foreskin, it's not guaranteed that it won't be damaged.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you notice discoloration and corruption in the genitals and foreskin, then it is advised to remove all that has become darkened and that which is beginning to rot or is already rotten; and apply a liniment over it made with honey, which is mixed with flour of millet groats and crushed and sieved ivy.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with the other remedy until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if bleeding persists, then administer lunar cautery in the following way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cautery juvenile is for two conditions at the same time, that is bleeding and the wound when it becomes corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed at that moment, then it is advised to insert a leaden cannula into the meat of the foreskin in order for the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless it is uncircumcised and circumcision is not required, and when adhesion occurs due to wounds or abscesses) it is advised to scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligaments are dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate those adhesions carefully, then it is advised to scrape the head of the penis and foreskin with a spatula for some time; this is because the foreskin, when thin, is easily pierced due to its delicate nature.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and head of the penis with a thin probe (dra7) that has been soaked in water, in order to prevent further adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then cure it with a styptic agent (vi stiptic) until it becomes solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleansing of infants and the healing of that which happens to those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds, but because it is part of our operation and our will, and its purpose is specifically in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best possible procedure and lightest loss for their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their free men, because it was not used in their laws. And this is because we have learned through experience that I have found most artisans and barbers using circumcision with a novacula (a type of knife) and cautery; and they use ligatures with filings and incisions with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have prohibited all these methods and did not find any better cleansing than with forceps, with ligatures of filings like the incision with the nail, because many times the foreskin escapes being cut, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains below, and it is very easy to make another incision and cause sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the type of cleansing performed by alphecati (mohel), which is done digitally, that the shoemakers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safe, because it easily slips into its opening.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a nail, it is very easy to blunt the iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of an infant is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But I have found through experience that the cleansing done with forceps and ligatures of filings is better. This is because the forceps make a proportional incision, so the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. And thus when you press your hand proportionally on both sharp edges, and cut according to a ratio in a certain amount of time; and it is made with a compression of filings that completely surrounds the foreskin of the rod, with which no error can occur.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you make the infant stand for a long time if it is one of those who can, and that you only tie the filings around its rod, leaving it on for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to make the infant happy and comfortable, so that it receives this procedure with understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make sure that the infant is held firmly and securely in your arms, and not loose; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your clothes so that the child does not see it or any other instrument.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the rod of the infant and blow gently on its foreskin, and pull it forward so that the head of the rod is exposed; and then clean the foreskin of any dirt or impurities that have accumulated there.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the area that has been marked with doubled filings, and tie another ligature a little below it, and place your finger over the lower ligature to ensure it is secure, and make the incision between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then gently lift the foreskin and uncover the head of the rod; and let a small amount of blood flow, which is better; and place some powder on it, and on top of the powder place a cloth soaked in a mixture of boiled honey and rose oil; and leave this on overnight. And care for the wound until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps used for cleansing should be as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The ends of the forceps should be some sharp and others blunt, so that the tip of the blade is not exposed and the length of both cutting edges should be equal to the length of the handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The risk in cleansing is that it is very easy for the inner foreskin to escape being cut completely or partially, which requires a further incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you pull the foreskin forward with your finger before making the incision and cut evenly according to its length.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot pull it forward with your finger, then use a hook and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and there is still inflammation under the rod, then wait until the swelling has subsided before removing any excess skin with ease, and make the incision according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful not to harm the head of the rod, as it should not be affected by this procedure.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, care for the wound with the powders that I recommended in the treatise on powders, so that the wound heals properly.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if too much of the foreskin has been cut and it reaches the area above, this is not noticeable.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But be sure to care for the wound with what I have said until it heals completely.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urinary retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urinary retention in the bladder can be caused by an obstruction such as a stone or congealed blood, or by pus or flesh, and similar to those causes of division that we have mentioned for treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is a risk of retention due to a stone in the bladder neck, then it is necessary for the patient to be positioned on their side.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the patient's legs over their abdomen and stretch out their belly above their hips, and have the patient contract their muscles as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And then the neck of the bladder constricts and expels the stone towards the back, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have mentioned and the cause is strong in the patient, then extraction should be performed with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be thin and concave like a quill pen, with a long, thin rod in its head that resembles the length of a handspan and a half, to which a thin cannula should be attached.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting urine with this is that you take the doubled filings and tie them to the end of a wool or cotton thread, and insert the ends of the filings into the lower part of the syringe, and make an incision with forceps if there is any excess cause from the wool, but introduce it into the cannula with force. And then slowly push the syringe inward with care and caution.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient lie on their side and massage their bladder and rod with warm oils, such as olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the rod; and then bend the rod upwards towards the navel; and then push the syringe further inward, guiding it to enter the bladder. This will ensure that the catheter has reached its intended destination and not deviated from its path.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And slowly extract the bile with the wool, because the urine will stain the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And do so gently and perform the cure for urine retention, using a syringe, do not stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of enema preparation for the bladder using a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or blood clots have formed there, or it is constricted by hardness, and you want to cause fluids and medicines to flow into it, then use an instrument called a "clamp" with this shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but rather it is closed on the outside, meaning that it is sealed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in this there are three openings: two on one side, as well as.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning there is a concave space, where that which is drawn in is located, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, until when any cause pulls the humors from it, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with that it is pulled, and when it is expelled for a long time, as the clamp does with which naphtha is injected in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	And so when you want to introduce fluids into the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the fluid and pull with it that which is drawn in towards the upper parts, because the fluid is pulled into the concavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamp into the penis as we have recommended in the syringe; and then draw up the fluid with what you are drawing up, because that fluid will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient should feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the subtle syringe with which the bladder is treated, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or lead, with its head resembling a small feather, and below that the tube descends gradually.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then hold the bladder in motion and place it on the syringe so that you can introduce the fluid that you want to treat the bladder with, and then place the syringe between two strong ligatures using double thread, and heat the fluid over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the syringe into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then you should tighten your hand over the bladder with the fluid, using gentle pressure, until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then you should take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and then perforate the entirety of its roundness; and then insert strong thread into those holes, so that they are tightly drawn together; and then attach the circle as if it were a funnel, so that you can hold in place whatever you want from among the humors, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you should attach that to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, expressing it with your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of calculi (stones) from the body.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and a stone generated in the bladder, and the symptoms of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that a stone can be operated on using the hand and cutting.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And a stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is one that is located in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	I will now explain this with clear and concise exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	And so I say that a stone generated in the bladder is most commonly found in children; and the symptoms of this are that the urine that comes out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears as sand in it; and the patient scratches his penis, and many times feels pain, and then is erect; and with this he expels many words about it.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children with this is possible up until they reach the age of fourteen; and it is a difficult cure in older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is easier because it is between those ages.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And with regard to the stone that is larger, its cure is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to this.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, at the beginning of the cure for this, it is necessary to cleanse the patient with a sternutatory (emetic) medicine that extracts all the opening in the intestines, because this opening sometimes prevents the penetration of the stone during the examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then place the patient with their feet elevated and have them lie on their bad side, so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder or jumps out of its place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then perform the incision with your hands prepared, and have the patient's hands away from their body, so that the bladder is completely tilted towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then search for it (the stone) and remove it completely from the outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then make an incision immediately over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not find it completely, then it is necessary to anoint your left index finger with oil (if the patient is a child) or your middle finger (if the patient is an adult), and introduce it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And search for the stone inside until you feel it with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually introduce it (the stone) into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it (the stone) with your finger and push it outside through the incision you made.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and order another assistant to stretch out the patient's thighs with one of their hands, and with the other hand, hold down the flank that is below the thighs, in the area near where you made the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then introduce a well-sharpened spatula, which has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide it (the spatula) in the area between the buttocks and thighs, not in the middle but rather towards the left side; and make the incision over the stone and place your finger in the rectum, making a transverse incision so that the outside opening is wide and the inside narrow, according to the size of the stone, but not larger, for it will be easy to compress the finger that is in the rectus near the stone with the incision, and the stone can easily be extracted.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have sharp angles and edges, making their removal difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And such a stone resembles a kidney bean in shape, is round and has a smooth surface.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is such a stone with sharp angles and edges, adjust the incision to fit it.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily extracted in this way, then it is necessary to push on it or pull on it with gentle traction, using an instrument that has a curved tip like a file, and you should not slip off the stone; or introduce a thin instrument with a curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot reach it (the stone), then widen the incision slightly and if you see a flow of blood, cut through it with a strong hand using a 3 times heated vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning, introduce your hand to the opening of the bladder and make an incision over it (the first stone); then gradually push a little further for each additional stone; and proceed in this manner if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance to make a large incision, for this can cause two problems for the patient: either they die or they develop continuous urinary discharge because the area is not completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer a purge before it (the stone) is extracted, or use forceps to extract it from the incision until it is removed in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and apply pressure to it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar or rose oil and water over it (the wound), so that the abscess is reduced.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then place the patient on their back with their head raised and do not remove the bandages until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you remove them (the bandages), wash the area with water and plenty of oil, then treat it with fine ointment and diabetic ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess forms in the wound that is both adhesive and corrosive, and it resembles frozen blood in the bladder, which prevents urine flow (and this is known by the presence of blood in urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood clot, for if it remains, it can cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And approach to wash the wound with wine vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all kinds, with whatever is convenient for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And it is necessary during the entire course of treatment that you lie with both thighs spread and adjust the medications that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the bladder, and has become impacted there, and urination is prohibited, then cure it with what I recommended before reaching incision, for too many have been accused of causing incision through this treatment; and I have proven that, and it is that you take a soft iron borer, which looks like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular extra piece, sharp, inserted into a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take bile and tie it to the bladder below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, penetrating with ease until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the borer with your hand in the small stone, gradually enlarging the hole until the other side is penetrated, for urination will be released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is broken off from the stone from the outside of the bladder, for it is trapped and has been pushed out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for some reason that prohibits it, then tie bile below the stone and another piece of bile above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cauterize the stone in the bladder between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligature and clean up the clotted blood in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie a ligature below the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and another ligature above it is not needed either, for when the bile is untied, the kidney returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And so it is necessary for you to lift the kidney upwards when you tie the bile above it, or let it return to its proper place and heal the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of bladder stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Bladder stones are rarely formed in women.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone is detected in any of them, then the cure is difficult and is forbidden in many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason for this is that women are easily frightened.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you cannot find a skilled woman who can determine if she has a stone or not when she is chaste or married to a man.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And the third reason is that you cannot find a skilled woman in this art, especially one who can perform the operation with her hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the location of the incision above the stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, requiring a deep incision and causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do so, then it is necessary to take a skilled female surgeon, but they are rare.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then look for a skilled and careful male surgeon, or present a mature woman who is experienced in female matters, or a woman who has already partially mastered this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, make the presentation and order her to do everything that you command, starting with the examination for the stone; which is necessary because she must determine if the woman is a virgin, in which case she should insert her finger into the anus and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if she finds one, then pinch it below her finger and then order her to make an incision above it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then order the mature woman to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and applying gentle pressure to help guide the stone towards her finger.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if she finds one, then it is necessary to gradually move the stone from the orifice of the bladder down towards the perineum using the full extent of her skill and strength until it reaches the tip of the scrotum.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision above the stone at the tip of the scrotum, in whichever location is most convenient for you, and center the stone in that location, ensuring that your finger does not become trapped or pinched by the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And make the incision small at first, and then insert the scalpel into the incision and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision based on the size and shape of the stone that you expect to remove.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are many: some are small and large, hard and rough, long and round, with or without ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should be aware of the different types of stones in order to indicate what you want to do about them.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to encourage bleeding, then apply a poultice of three hundred grains of verdigris and leave it on for an hour until the blood has been released, and then return to your operation until the stone has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And ensure that you prepare the necessary instruments for removing stones in men, so that you are assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to encourage bleeding and know that the source of the bleeding is an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and tighten it with a compress and bandage, but do not repeat this, and leave the stone in place and do not remove it, for the patient will soon die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the intensity of the bleeding has decreased after several days and the wound has begun to heal, then you may return to your operation until the stone has been removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter Sixty-Two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for an inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is not anything other than an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane located below the kidneys of the genitals that contains the water, and is called the scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper fat that nature has prepared in the part of the water, until it is ripe and becomes another water; and it is the kidney of the genital between the white membrane that we mentioned earlier, and it is not anything other than a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the groin, due to which this matter is infused into that area, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck on the groin.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, for its color is sometimes tending towards yellowish or blood-red, or it is red, or it is black and feces-like, or it is watery and whitish, and that is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is in this area are: for if it is in the white cephala (head) that we mentioned, then the abscess is round, tapering slightly towards length, shaped like an egg, and the groin appears, because the humidity surrounds it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the true fascia (a layer of fibrous tissue), then the abscess is round with a cleft like an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the cord of the groin and the white head, then press below the chin.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then press the color of the humidity in the abscess with a blunt probe, the shape of which is known; and according to what comes out on the tip of the probe, judge from that what it is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron (surgery), then it is appropriate to order the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and sometimes empty their stomach.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let them be turned over onto their side for some reason and place a thick cloth beneath them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of the patient and order the minister to be at their right, extending his rod (probe) to one or two fingers' breadths to the cord in the groin and the border of the mirror (umbilicus) of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and cut the cord in the groin from the middle towards length near the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to right measure, equally distant from the line of the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white head (head of the abscess) and encompasses it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And clean it out, and observe and be careful not to cut too deep, and your incision with which you clean it should be made in parts so that it is suspended by the largest and thinnest egg (abscess), and carefully examine the incision according to the quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white head full of water with a wide perforation and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the incision with hooks and extend the white head (head of the abscess) towards the upper parts; and do not touch the cord in the groin, and cut into the white head in such a way as it is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut into it with its entirety or in pieces, and mainly its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the egg protrudes from that outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the white head (head of the abscess), return it inside, and then join the two lips of the cord in the groin with suturing, and take care of it as for other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to cut the vessels that are over the fascia (suspensory ligament) and extract the egg, and take care of it as we mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is gathered in two parts (abscesses), then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut into that part as you did with the other one, and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then clean the blood, and introduce into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose oil (oil of roses); and place another wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, spread it over both groins and the navel; and place doubled cloths and padding on top, and bind those with a linen bandage that is according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then let two cloths be pressed and filled with red wool according to this shape; and the extremities with which it is pressed should be made of cotton or wet wool, and they should be fastened with tension in the front of the underpants, and one of the extremities should take hold of the buttocks from inside to outside, and the second should take hold at the border of the pubic bone, and two extremities on both sides below the thighs, and two other extremities on both sides above the hips, and all the tension should be adjusted in the front of the underpants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with cautery instead of incision with iron (surgery); and it is that you take a subtle surgical knife and cut the cord in the groin with it, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white head containing the water is uncovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form: [The text describes the shape of the cautery but I couldn't understand it, it may be some specific tool or instrument from medieval medicine. If you want me to try to interpret it please let me know]
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is shaped like the Greek letter. (Alpha)
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with it (cautery) the white head, and ignite until all the humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the white head with hooks, and clean it with hooks, and clean it with a subtle heated cautery; and cut into it as much as possible in order to eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg (abscess).
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and less prone to bleeding, and better than an operation with incision. This passage is highlighting the advantages of using cautery over surgery in treating hernias, as it causes less bleeding, less risk of infection and faster recovery.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you have an abscess (apostema) at the time of incision or at the time of cautery, or bleeding, then it is necessary that you treat the condition that opposes you because of this, with treatment that is appropriate for it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as we have recommended; and this is when you are certain, because of what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery (full of fluid).
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And now it is necessary that you place the patient on an elevated seat, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and place the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to allow all the water to escape.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place cotton on the location, bind it and leave it, so that the remaining water runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then take care of it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the evacuation of water at that time, then you should perforate it: and this is not done except because the white fascia in the wound orifice creates resistance and prevents the release of water, therefore, it is necessary to insert into the wound a probe or instrument with which water was extracted from hydrops patients, the shape of which is known; or apply pressure on the opposite side of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water can return and accumulate again after several months or years; and when it does, then it should be perforated in the same manner, because the patient will thus pass his days (i.e., survive). This passage suggests that hernias may recur even after successful treatment, due to the buildup of fluid over time. In such cases, the physician should follow the same procedure as before, including making an incision and draining the fluid, to ensure the patient's well-being.
Capitol .lxiii.	This is the end of this section, Capital LXIII, of this medieval medical text. It deals with the diagnosis and treatment of hernias, including surgical procedures, cauterization, and other methods for draining fluid from the affected area. The text emphasizes the importance of careful observation and assessment of the patient's condition, as well as the need to consider individual factors such as age, overall health, and level of fear or anxiety when choosing a treatment approach. The use of cauterization and perforation is recommended over more invasive surgical procedures in certain cases, due to their lower risk of bleeding, infection, and other complications. Overall, the text demonstrates the sophisticated understanding of anatomy, pathology, and surgical techniques that was available in medieval medical practice, and highlights the important role that observation, experience, and careful judgement played in the successful treatment of hernias and other conditions.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Capitolo LXIII: Incisioni sulla ernia carnosa e la sua cura.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	It is important to note that in the section on this type of hernia, there is a fear of danger and harm, especially in more complicated cases. In my experience, it is often best to avoid surgery and opt for a less invasive approach, such as draining the fluid or using a support garment, in order to minimize risk and promote healing. Ultimately, the goal should always be to ensure the safety and well-being of the patient.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that hernia and the types of abscesses (apostemas) that can occur. The text suggests that a variety of abscesses can form in relation to this type of hernia, including those caused by infection or inflammation of the surrounding tissues. It is important for the physician to carefully assess the patient's condition and determine the appropriate course of treatment, taking into account any underlying medical conditions or factors that may increase the risk of complications. In some cases, surgery may be necessary to remove the hernia and drain any abscesses, while in other cases, medication or other non-surgical treatments may be sufficient to manage the condition.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that an abscess (apostemas) can form in the groin area of those whose genitals are weakened for many reasons: either due to acute sharp excess fluid that is infused into the groin or due to a blow to the area. This passage highlights how weakness in the groin area, whether caused by injury or other factors, can make individuals more susceptible to developing abscesses and hernias in this region. It also emphasizes the importance of addressing any underlying medical conditions or risk factors that may contribute to the development of these conditions.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of an abscess (apostemas) depends on the color of the affected tissue and is not necessarily associated with pain. It is a severe condition. This passage suggests that the appearance of an abscess may vary depending on the location and severity of the infection, but its presence should not be judged solely based on the level of pain experienced by the patient. A severe abscess can occur even in the absence of significant discomfort, and it is important for medical professionals to carefully evaluate any signs or symptoms that may indicate the presence of an infection.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A hard abscess (apostemas) is one that has become encapsulated and its color is dark, and it is not sensitive to touch. This type of abscess is more severe than a soft, tender one and may require surgical intervention to drain the pus and promote healing. The dark color of the abscess indicates the presence of dead tissue and bacteria, which can lead to further infection and complications if left untreated. It's important for physicians to assess the severity of an abscess and determine the appropriate course of treatment based on its size, location, and other factors.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by entanglement of the veins and arteries or by inflammation of those same veins, which has already been felt, or by inflammation of the veins. This passage highlights that abscesses can be caused by various factors such as entanglement or inflammation of blood vessels. It is important for physicians to thoroughly examine and understand the underlying cause of an abscess in order to properly treat it and prevent future occurrences. In some cases, this may involve surgical intervention, while in others, medication or lifestyle changes may be sufficient.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries can be recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when it is compressed with the fingers, and it is not advisable to touch it. This passage suggests that inflammation of the arteries (arteritis) can cause an abscess or swelling that disperses easily upon compression, indicating a more serious underlying condition. It is important to avoid touching or applying pressure to this type of abscess as it may exacerbate the inflammation and potentially lead to further complications. Proper diagnosis and treatment by a medical professional are crucial for addressing the root cause of the abscess and ensuring a successful recovery.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The swelling caused by venous inflammation should not be dispersed by any means, but rather compressed with the aforementioned.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that incision can be made on this type (of swelling) and on the surrounding flesh; for you should insert a retractor into the ligaments of the genitals, then stretch the skin towards the upper parts, extract the white cephalic vein, free the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and tie them. Then, insert the suspensory ligament more deeply than where you freed it from all sides of the cephalic vein parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the vein is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, it is necessary to extract the vein and make an incision there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion in the cephalic region for some reason, or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and make a round incision there.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is native flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary to cut everything that belongs to it and extract the vein as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and vinegar; and take care of it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that is in the groin.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A hernia is an abscess enveloped by some covering similar to a swelling with softening of the testicles, and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to what precedes it, which is a reminder (of the pain and complications).
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to say operation in the second case as in the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that it is necessary to make the patient lie on an elevated pillow; then pull the suspensory ligament of the testicles towards the lower parts; and pull the ligaments of the genitals with the aforementioned ties towards the rod; and hold those other ministers (assistants) that you have, and stretch them with strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then make an incision with a broad, sharp spathula in a transverse direction into the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all parts as we have said in the extraction of hernia, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is double thread, and tie it at the beginning of the places where hernia occurs, and tie the other end at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then make an incision in the middle location for a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the putrid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds where there is a desire for healing to occur, so that the vessels which nourish one of the two testicles do not fall, for it is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if hernia occurs in all the vessels, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or that the testicles are cut off with the vessels because they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they become atrophied, or that they are removed so that they are not helpful for those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the cephalic region extended over the abdomen from some of the intestines of the stomach, so that when these intestines come out of that rupture, they enter into it.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cephalic region or from its absence, and these two types occur for many reasons: impact, coughing, shouting, lifting heavy objects, or similar things. [http://medieval-spanish.stanford.edu/13texts/torregiano/Torregiano\_13.html](http://medieval-spanish.stanford.edu/13texts/torregiano/Torregiano_13.html)
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cephalic region, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms inside towards the preon because the cephalic region compresses the intestines.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this, when it is due to section of the cephalic region, is that at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it appears as a diverse abscess below the apparent swollen area, and this is because of protrusion of the intestine, and the body is outside the cephalic region. [http://medieval-spanish.stanford.edu/13texts/torregiano/Torregiano\_13.html](http://medieval-spanish.stanford.edu/13texts/torregiano/Torregiano_13.html)
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestines are expelled with the membrane, and this is called an incarcerated intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is formed with flatulence, and sometimes it occurs in a split intestine and becomes trapped there, and this causes great danger to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain that worsens when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the types of this illness with iron, there is fear because it is necessary to avoid injury in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is to command the patient to reposition the intestine with their hand towards the inner parts of its cavity if they obey its return, and then be covered with your hands and place them on their hips, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord that ties the cord of the testicles towards the upper parts, and make an incision in the entire length of the cord of the testicles; and then place two hooks on both sides of the section to open it with those hooks as needed.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the amount that is possible for you so that the vein is expelled from it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the covering of the cephalic region that is below the cord of the testicles, until the hard white part of each side of it is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then insert your finger in what ties the testicle, in that which is between the white cephalic part, which is below the cord of the vein, and between the cephalic region itself; and separate it with the adhesion that is in the backside of the vein.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the cord of the testicles with your hand towards the outer parts, and extend the white cephalic part upwards with your left hand, and lift the vein with the cephalic region towards the location of the incision; and command your assistant to stretch the vein upwards, while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And make sure with your fingers that there is no cause of the intestine wrapped in the hard white cephalic part.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause in it, then pull that towards the lower abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle in which there is thick thread made of wax and dipped in a solution of six herbs, and insert that into the backside of the cephalic region, which is below the cord of the testicles, where the incision was made; and then make four incisions in the protruding ends of the thread inside until they are completely embedded in it, and shape them in some way like a cross; and tie it strongly with two parts to the cephalic region that we said is below the cord of the testicles.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them strongly until some of the vessels that nourish those do not send any cause for an abscess to form there.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then place another ligature as close to the first ligature as possible, but at least three digits away from it; and let these two ligatures remain below the cephalic region that is below the cord of the testicles by a length equivalent to the size of the digit, and make an incision in the remaining part according to its roundness, and remove the vein from it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision in the area below the cord of the testicles for a section from which blood and healing flow as we have recommended in what we said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the ligature that we recommended (and sometimes the white cephalic part is cauterized, which we said before causes fear of bleeding during the incision, because often this occurs); and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if healing is delayed, then apply hot water and place it on top until it falls off as we said before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound with other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Chapter 66: On Ventral Hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, I have not seen anyone who has been brave enough to attempt its cure using iron instruments.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first (doctors) said that it is made in the same way as we have recommended for the hernia that is in the groin; which is to tie off the veins near the incision with ease and then make an incision in the middle location around the abscess, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound in the way we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Chapter 67: On Disruption in the Intestines
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the sinews as we have said, and protrudes from the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	The intestines should not be allowed to descend into the groin; and if they do, it should only be a little; and they will return upward in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if this is prolonged, then a fissure must be made in the abdomen so that the intestines can descend into the abdomen; and this happens due to the stretching of the abdominal muscles which are in the sinews as we have said, which causes the abdominal muscles to stretch, become soft, and form an abscess and protrude.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with cautery as has been described earlier.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands and you dry the location of the rupture from the abscesses that protrude with a section along its length according to three fingers wide.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white abdomen which is below the ribcage so that it becomes exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and place it on the prominent location of the abdomen, and press it firmly against the patient's belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew together the two prominent locations on the end of the rod of the abdomen, and bind one to the other with sutures.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the rod without penetrating the abdomen completely, nor extend the belly or cause any other harm as you know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure this with the treatment of wounds and clean it when you insert the fields, and restore the wound so that it heals and the area of the rupture is strengthened; for the abdomen contracts and does not allow the protrusion to be corrected.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautionery is better in this location, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the groin area around the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often the groin area around the testicles becomes soft in some men because the flesh between it is softened and this occurs due to neglect.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the person responsible for treating this condition to make the patient lie on their back and pull up all the softened groin area over the natural groin and then sew together two lips of flesh with sutures.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if desired, you can first sew the excess softened groin area with three or four stitches and firm sutures.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the stitches, and then cure with the treatment of wounds until it heals and the fields fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that in our religion, castration is forbidden; but it is necessary for me to mention it in this book, and the mention of it is not required except for two reasons, one of which is so that it is part of the doctor's knowledge when he is questioned about it, that he knows how to treat it if it occurs; and the other reason is that we often need castration of other animals for our livestock such as mules, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through to make an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the method of castration by crushing, the procedure for the operation is to submerge the animal in hot water until its testicles become soft and loose and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take hold of them with your hand until they are relaxed and do not appear under the skin.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in the method of castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and press its groin area with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie up the spermatic cord and make an incision on each testicle with a cut deep enough to process two of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then suture any pustules that you have lanced.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave anything on the abdomen, but instead apply a light bandage which is above the wound.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration by crushing is better because it leaves no residue from the testicles and allows the animal to continue desiring coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men can occur in two ways: one is that a space appears in the groin area of the testicles, between two testicles, and this looks like a woman's labia.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes the urethra that is in the groin area of the testicles becomes blocked.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, it is a different type: and that is when the labia of the woman above the pubic bone looks like two testicles of a man slightly minimized at the outer end, just like the scrotum and testicles of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds, two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary to suture the swollen flesh until the inflammation subsides and then cure those with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men where the urethra is in the groin area of the testicles, there is neither a cure nor an operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On eyelashes and protruding flesh caused by women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Eyelashes that are slightly prominent due to natural causes can be corrected with proper care and attention, but sometimes in some women they become so prominent that they spread out like those of men and even interfere with sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, it is necessary to hold the excess eyelashes with your hand or tweezers and cut them.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not delay in carrying out the incision, especially in the region of the bladder, to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that wound with care until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Newly born flesh is the flesh that forms in the womb and fills it up, which easily comes out in parts similar to a tail (and for this reason I will call this condition "tailed disease"); therefore, we must incise in the same way as we do for an abscess, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of pleurisy.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Pleurisy is when a woman's chest is not pierced, or has a small hole in it.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accidental pleurisy is caused by a disease that has occurred beforehand, and this can be brought about either by flesh that has not been properly adjusted or by a thin or dense substance.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	An accidental pleurisy can be caused by an infection in the mother's womb, inflammation of the ribs, or a swelling in the upper or lower part of the body, and it can prevent sleep, physical exertion, and childbirth, and often delays menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The diagnosis of this condition can be made by observing the mother's symptoms, if they are obvious, then note them down. But if they are not obvious, then examine the patient using your hands or a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a thin substance and is located near the two lips (presumably referring to the labia of the female genitalia), then you should apply pressure and break it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers on the two lips and then gently press them with both hands using your fingertips.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And have the woman lie on her back with her buttocks raised and legs spread apart, then use gentle but firm pressure to open up the two lips until the thin substance is broken through and the obstruction is cleared.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take some wool and soak it in oil, place it on the area and cover it with a cloth to prevent the incision from becoming infected.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the substance is thick and dense, then you must make an incision with a spatula or a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a tumor or swelling, then use a hook to suspend it and make an incision there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use these medications that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as henbane, dragon's blood, and alum mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not close too quickly and become infected.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep the wound open for several days, applying a poultice made from the dry powder of the plant.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with the usual treatment for healing until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens that other flesh is born in the womb, and then you must proceed in this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is caused by a hard abscess in the womb, then you should not use any iron instruments at all on the abscess.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and piles and red botches that occur in the female genitalia.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a prolapse of dilated veins in which continuous bleeding occurs, and when they become chronic and develop ulcers.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the classification what their species are and what their signs are, and I will now say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are inside the womb and do not appear to the senses, should not be treated with iron instruments in such cases.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the womb and can be felt with the senses are those that should be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to place the woman in a hot bath and then extend her thighs with forceps or rough cloth, and cut those hemorrhoids with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then apply powder to those areas using the blood flow from one of the incisive powders without pain, such as henbane and similar to it.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then wrap her feet in bandages for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if there is persistent bleeding, then make a concoction of willow and corn silk and walnuts and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour made from barley and mix it with honey, vinegar, and wine, and make a poultice with that and apply it to the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that's good; and if not, then use two suction cups, and make incisions in the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in juice from clover or juice from ragwort or juice from vervain with diluted wine, and attach it to the affected area. Then cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the condition is severe and requires rough treatment, then it is necessary to cut what appears to be a hemorrhoid based on your judgement, according to what I have said in the previous section about treating ulcers with cautery.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of perforation of a wound in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many types of abscesses occur in the mother, such as cancer, hard abscess, ulcers, abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ruptures, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already mentioned these illnesses and their types and symptoms, and the cures for them in the previous section.[/PI>
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary for me to mention in this treatise the boil that comes in the mother when one of the abscesses bursts and if you want to know how the operation of it with iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, you should consider if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it reddens and emits pus above it. If so, then do not perform perforation of it, but instead cure it by helping the maturation process until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.[ \>
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you should have the woman sit on a chair with two seats; and recline her back on her side and adjust her legs below the lower part of her belly, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her knees, and bind each one appropriately.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow with the lancet and administer the instrument that opens the orifice of the mother, the form of which will come in those cases that are made later.[ \>
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you insert with the edge the prepuce of the mother (vulva) of the woman, and the part that enters the mother should not be more than the width of the prepuce and gentle to the patient. [ >
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the width of the prepuce of the mother, then it is necessary that you place pulvills (small pieces of soft material) on the surface of the prepuce of the mother so that the entire instrument is prevented from entering the prepuce of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you place the grease (or possibly "fever" in this context) that runs on the surface of the lancet blade above and that the one who administers holds the instrument and turns the grease (or fever) until the orifice of the mother is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the incision is made, and it is touched with the hand and is bleeding and wet, then it is necessary that you dry it with a piece of cloth or sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you place a wick soaked in rose oil or oil with styptic properties on the wound; and place the bandage on the incision in the prepuce of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the mother and on top of the bandage (or possibly "belly" in this context) clean wool soaked in water with crushed marshmallows added to it.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with ointment for two days, using an amount that is appropriate until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mother and the wound are washed with water and honey, and also with water in which rosemary or long-leafed aristolochia has been boiled, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the mother's womb, then it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron and instead cure it with what has been said in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capital LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how fetal beings are treated when born according to an unnatural form (monstrosity).
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognizes in the beginning the form of a normal childbirth through its signs, and this is that when you see the woman pushing at the lower parts and desires to smell the air, and she is relieved by what is above her (the baby), and hastens the expulsion of the fetus, then know that this birth is according to the natural form, and it is the expulsion of it upon its head, and the afterbirth attached to or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the woman's belly so that the fetus descends easily because when it emerges on its head, give her the afterbirth, and clean it of those excesses with good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, because when the fetus emerges on its feet and its body is emerging in front of its head and its legs or one arm are outside (or "at the pe" in the original text, which is unclear), or it emerges with the head and one arm or the belly first, and turns very quickly onto its neck (or "col" in the original text), resembling those unnatural forms (of monstrosities).
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be knowledgeable and skilled in all of those cases (of childbirth), and that she avoids errors and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I have shown the entire figure of those (cases), and what signs are in them, so that they can be interpreted by that and stand for them.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the baby has emerged on its head due to natural labor, and it is heavy on the woman and makes her delivery difficult, and sometimes its strength is already weakened, then do this: have her sit up or have her hold (the baby), and evaporate the mucus from it with a fig of fenugreek and warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife should insert her small, split spatula between the woman's teeth and use it to detach the afterbirth or cut it with her fingernail until the watery substance in it is expelled.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's belly until the afterbirth is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out (the afterbirth), then the woman should be treated with a poultice of powdered myrtle and ground fenugreek seeds mixed with crushed chickpeas.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And approach the patient, and tell them to tightly compress their chest and make them sneeze using some method; and keep their mouth and nose covered for an hour, for this will cause the foul air to be expelled immediately.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the patient are initially trembling, then you must slowly and gradually bring them back to normal.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if they do not obey the treatment, then place a woman on a stool and lift the patient's legs up, and have the stool knocked against the ground; and make sure that the woman does not fall during this concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned to their normal position and the patient dies, then make an incision in the hands and extract the foreign object or bind the arms to your body with a cloth and pull it out gently, for this will cause the foul air to be expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the positioning of the fetus on its feet in the womb.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, then you must press gently on its back to turn it over, and gradually knead it and massage it, and then take one of its legs and slowly stretch it out.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But if it has become stuck between the thighs, then tell the patient to push, and make them sneeze using some method, for this will cause the fetus to be expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled using the methods described, then gradually return the fetus to its normal position until you have restored its natural shape, for this will then cause it to be expelled with a gentle force.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all of the above methods have failed, then take some althea root and dissolved gum, and grind them together in a mortar with a strong force, and apply it to the woman's cervix and the lower abdomen of the patient.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And perform this procedure with warm water, until you have reached the hypochondria region (the area just above the hips).
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the patient's external parts have been soothed, then apply to them a fumigation of myrtle and place it under their nose.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after an hour of fumigation, then place the patient on a stool and make them sneeze and clear their throat, and then lift them up and apply gentle pressure to the lowest part of their abdomen, for the fetus will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Delivery of the fetus on its hands and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus comes out in this manner (feet-first), then you must gently insert your hands and guide its arms out one at a time. The woman should be positioned on her elbows with her legs hanging down and resting on the bed, while you complete the delivery of the arms.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press down on the woman's abdomen to help guide the legs out, and gradually extract what is below the feet from the thighs until it is ready to come out from the lower part of the birth canal.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus has not yet been expelled, then take hold of its legs and move them vigorously to help pull it out. At the same time, apply gentle pressure to the area just above the hips until the fetus moves upwards towards the birth canal.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then guide its arms out and massage the fetus gently as you gradually deliver it. Continue to encourage the woman to push until the fetus is completely expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Delivery of a fetus lying horizontally with one of its arms extended.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If the arm cannot be guided back into the correct position, then lift the woman's hips and make her change position.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If changing position does not help, then have her lie on her back and apply strong pressure to her hips with repeated blows or shocks, while also administering soothing remedies and recommending mucilaginous foods.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	Once the delivery is complete, place the woman on a stool and focus on guiding the arm back into its proper position, then massage the fetus gently to return it to its natural shape. Encourage the woman to sneeze and instruct her to push until the afterbirth is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Delivery of a fetus with its arms extended and its back facing its mother's spine.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the fetus and gently turn it while easing it out.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And once it has emerged and as soon as it is possible, place it on the woman's abdomen as we have recommended, using oil and mucilaginous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then you should encourage the woman to breastfeed gradually, and once that is done, place her on a stool with her legs hanging down and slightly inclined to one side, and apply gentle pressure to help expel any remaining placenta. Encourage her to sneeze to aid in this process.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Delivery of a prepared fetus lying on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it is time to cut the umbilical cord according to this method, pay attention and then proceed to make a small incision with your fingernail until it is fully drained of fluid.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the fetus is hanging by its face or neck, then make an incision with a lancet to ensure that it is not constricted and can be safely delivered.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then gently push the fetus back into the birth canal until it is in the correct position, and instruct the woman to take deep breaths to help expel it with a gentle force, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born several times, and sometimes even three or four, but this is rare and happens late; but it is due to natural causes and they are not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And it is said that in the case of multiple fetuses, sometimes one is attached to the other by a membrane and must be separated from it by cutting through the connecting tissue at the navel. Each fetus will have its own set of ligaments, and some may be delivered naturally with gentle force, while others may require more difficult or non-standard methods as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if the abscesses are difficult to mature and reach what we said about unnatural figures, then you cure them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife skillfully does this with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared by her cunning, leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	The remembrance of what is formed in the uterus from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women have multiple pregnancies, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even ten fetuses, and I have verified that one woman aborts and gives birth to five, while another delivers all ten, a result brought about by the calculations of wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this falls under the knowledge/science of the midwife because she easily recognizes a similar appearance in that, and therefore she opposes it with what is appropriate.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter seventy-six.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it does not come out, and you are forced to use surgery with your hand, then it is necessary that you consider if the woman has good health and does not suffer from any of the accidents for which there is a fear of loss/risk.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary for the woman to be positioned on her back on a bed, and her head should be tilted downwards and her thighs raised upwards.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her from both sides or be tied to the bed in order to prevent her body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mouth of the woman with warm oils and with marshmallow mucilage, as well as with fenugreek and flax seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then gently insert her hand into the uterus, and then carefully search for the place in which she can hook her fingers onto the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place incisions there: then consider if the fetus is positioned to descend upon the mother's abdomen, and in that case, place the forceps on the heels of the baby, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or on the baby's shoulder blades, or under the ribs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if it is descending toward the baby's feet, then in the perineum or in the middle of the ribcage.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the forceps with the right hand and place the curve of them in the location that is between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the forceps into one of those locations that we have mentioned, until reaching the cause of the problem.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another forceps or the third one, if necessary, in apposition to it, so that there is traction and not just extension according to its natural shape.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it is better in every way, so that the incision may be eased as well as when a tooth is extracted.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that area between them that extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of her mentioned remedies with oil and introduce them there and rotate them with what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the baby is prolapsed, then the forceps should be rotated into the location that is more open; and do so until the entire baby has been delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is outside before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction, then a cloth must be wrapped around it; and then pull it out until it is fully delivered, and make an incision in it at the joint of the hand or the fingers.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And it is also necessary to do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the baby's head is large or there is constriction in the delivery, or if there is water trapped in its head, then it is necessary to insert the spatula-like instrument and split the head open and extract the water, or else use an instrument called an "alundat," which has a similar shape to the other instruments described in this text.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, it should be done if the baby has a naturally large head: and then it is necessary to make an incision in it with a scalpel, or else use an instrument called an "alundat" as we have mentioned; and then extract the bones using forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has emerged but is constricted at the shoulders, then it should be split open in order to release the fluid in the feet.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there are no complications and the delivery is not obstructed, then you should make an incision in the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower abdomen of the mother is affected by an abscess or edema, then you should puncture it to release the fluid that has accumulated there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the baby is positioned feet-first (breech), then the traction required to deliver it will be lighter and its descent towards the mother's birth canal will be easier.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if the baby is stuck with its belly and feet pressed against the mother's pelvis, then you should extract the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the mother's abdomen and pelvis to release what is inside.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are obstructed and the head is turned back, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's vagina is narrow, then she should insert her hand into the labia and search for the head with it, and pull it towards the mother's vagina. Then she should insert one or two forceps into it, and pull it out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	But if the mother's vagina is constricted due to an abscess caused by a stone, then it should not be pressed or forced open; instead, moist and fatty substances should be administered.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices, and follow the patient with warm and moist treatments.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the abscess is on his side, then if possible, it should be lanced, and administered what we have said in the case of a living person.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then make an incision in layers and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary to remove all causes of inflammation from the wound.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that arise from wounds.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then apply stiptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman in whose belly a dead fetus was, and then another pregnancy occurred over that same location, and the second fetus also died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An abscess occurred in your belly for a long time, and it became so swollen that pus burst out, and the arm began to swell as well.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called upon to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied strong-attraction plasters to him for certain causes, and extracted a bone from him, and after several days, another bone came out; and I was greatly surprised that there could be bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I considered that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I investigated the wound and extracted many bones from it, the woman being in a state of great anxiety, but she lived for a long time afterwards, with only a small part of her arm remaining.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not find it strange, because in this matter there is science and assistance for the physician who skillfully administers treatment with his hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The shape of a lancet with which the womb is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a stretcher in which the limbs are held, with two handles at both ends of two pieces of wood.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this handle must be thinner than the stretcher and made either of ivory or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each piece of wood should be two fingers and the edge of each should be one finger wide, and the length of each should be a palm and a half; and in place of the two pieces of wood there should be two joints of the same piece of wood that are already fastened, the length of which is a little more than a palm, and the width of each should be two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted in the mouth of the womb so that it can be opened with them when you turn the prescribed handles.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to it, but thinner and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of boxwood or ebony, similar to forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two additional parts, and the length of these additional parts is a palm, and the width of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb with these, then have the woman lie on her back with her legs apart and her buttocks raised.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument like you would do with forceps, according to how much of the opening of the womb you want to make, until the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of a lancet that the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The shape of an instrument used to push the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of a compressor with which the large head is contained.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, and sometimes this instrument is made long like forceps according to this shape, with teeth like a saw that are used for cutting and containing.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of a small compressor:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of a hook with a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of a hook with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The shape of forceps with serrated teeth used to contain the head of the fetus.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a spatula having two ends used to cut off the head:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The shape of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments should be practiced with and as their species are multiplied and prepared by the craftsmen, the lighter they will be for their operation and more useful they will be for people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not be afraid to use these instruments whenever necessary, because their necessity cannot be avoided.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of abscesses:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the abscess is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to command the woman to hold her breath, and then have her sneeze with caution, and place your hand on her mouth and nostrils; if it comes out by itself, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, then take a sponge and make a hole in it, put inside it herbs that are wet with the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, Arabic spikenard, cinnamon wood, and storax.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the sponge, and then place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed cannula in the mouth of the womb and keep it inside so that the vapor reaches the cavity of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then induce her to sneeze as we have said, and the abscess will come out quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment does not work and the abscess does not come out, then order the midwife to dip her left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow ointment, and then insert it into the abscess cavity and search for it with her fingers. Once she has found it, then gently pull on it little by little, taking care not to tear the membranes of the womb.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Beforehand, make sure that the patient's right and left sides are even (symmetrical).
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction, because it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is obstructed, we have already recommended the treatment with emetic (sternutation) and medication for the pain with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the recommended causes, then be careful not to repeat the process of abstraction. Instead, make sure that what comes out of her mouth from the mother goes to the woman's thigh and then cauterize it with ointment and tetrafarmacon (a type of medical salve). This will cause it to rot and dissolve in a few days and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it begins to rot, it will cause harm to the patient's head and stomach, and then it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate treatments for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But the ulcers of the Ancients were already treated with sub-fumigation of nitric acid and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of an instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated should be for the retention of menstruation and secondines (afterbirth):
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of glass or earthenware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end should be placed in the woman's vagina and the wide end above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed on top of the coals.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it in place until the sub-fumigation is consumed and then replace it with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an unperforated child's bottom (rectal area).
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The mouths of infants are sucking and their bottoms (rectal area) are not perforated, which is subtle and blocked (closed).
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, it is the midwife's responsibility to perforate that blockage with her finger; and if not, then perforate it with a sharp spatula, but be careful not to touch the artery.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over it (the perforated area); and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it will become blocked again, then insert a cannula in the tract for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus becomes blocked due to consolidation from inflammation or abscess; in this case, it is necessary to incise that consolidation and treat it with what we have said about treatment and lead. (plom = lead)
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur afterwards (develop later).
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part, below, are knots and thickenings which occur near the anus or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is a fistula or many."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And when that knot is old and has run out of wet and white putrefied substance or fine powder, some of these fistulas have penetrated."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And those that penetrate are known by what comes out of them through the exit and flatulence; and sometimes the patient uses an exit, and it is very easy for worms to come out."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And some of these fistulas, in the space, penetrate into the bladder and into the flesh of the penis; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the groin."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And what distinguishes a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one is that you insert your finger into the anus and carefully introduce a thin piece of glass or metal into the fistula where there is no tortuousity."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuousity in that area, then carefully insert a thin probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel it with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it (the probe) at all or cannot proceed with the passage due to any cause of evacuation, such as stool, worms, or flatulence, as we have mentioned, then know that it is non-penetrating, and so turn your attention to its treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from it and the prevention of that until the place with medicine is healed.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area around it, then its symptom is that when you insert a probe into it, if there is no tortuousity within the bone, there will be pain in the area around it; and pus will always come out of it; and no medicine will work on it, nor can it be healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all cases of penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment for them is hard work and futility on the part of the foolish doctors who attempt it.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected, according to what I have recommended and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the patient should lie on their back with their hands under their head and raise their legs in the air, with their buttocks inclined towards their stomach, and then insert a probe made of lead or glass if there is twisting in the fistula until you can determine where the probe goes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if you feel the patient around the anus, then you must insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your finger the probe already inserted and discovered penetrating, or something else between your finger and the fistula or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and so do not work on it, because it cannot be healed, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some people say that it is healed in some old men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medication by which healing is expected in it (the fistula) is that you light a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been described before, and insert the burning cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the diseased flesh around the fistula has been burned away, similar to a bird's feather quill.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure it with hot compresses wrapped in a cloth until all the burned flesh has healed, and then cure it with medicines that promote tissue growth and consolidation. If it is healed, that's good; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate inside your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or membrane, and sometimes the fistula appears on the surface of the skin, then dry out the skin starting from the beginning of the fistula with the probe. Dry it out using the probe until the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is in the fistula, and then use the probe to release and remove the blockage in the fistula.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean the fistulated flesh which is similar to a feather quill of a bird and leave no residue of any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows instead of pus when you insert the instrument and perform the operation on those tissues, then you must burn it with a hot iron or an acute medicine because cauterization with fire has two good effects: namely, the burning of those diseased tissues and the cutting off of the blood flow by drying up the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure it with hot compresses wrapped in a cloth or a piece of linen until the wound is healed, and then cure the wound with hard-skin-generating and consolidating ointments.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines, which have astringent and drying properties; when they are used, the injury is restored and healed, and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated deep into the rectum of the anus and is extending from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you find the opening and between you and it is an obstacle of pus or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it should not be operated on but rather treated with trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This condition can be treated in one of three ways: by cauterizing the opening as we have said; or by drying it out until you are able to reach the cavity, so that you can introduce the necessary treatment; and do not dry it out too much, so as not to damage the muscle that holds in the intestines, and cause involuntary discharge from the patient; and heal it with what we have said, for it will easily be healed. Or by removing the obstacle and cleaning out the pus that has formed within, as we have said, either with your finger or with another sharp instrument, and then clean the fistulous flesh in the area where you can make an incision; and then try to heal the entire wound with an incision, and if the opening of the wound does not close, and the fistula remains open at the end of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you insert your finger into the fistula, it is located near the surface of the body around the edge of the anus, and then take hold of a blunt extremity, similar to a needle for preparing hearts in this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into the sheath of pus or around it, and then insert your finger coated with pus into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it has penetrated near the edge of the anus, then remove the sheath from the opening, and insert your finger into the anus, and extract the end of the sheath and align both ends, pulling on each one, leaving it in place for a day or two. And when you reinsert the sheath into the flesh, pull it tightly so that the flesh between the two ends of the sheath is cut and falls away.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not deep enough, then make it deeper using any means available to you, but not so much that you damage the muscle; and then heal it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of a pointed spatula, with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not damage anything unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids where blood is flowing from their incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus like charcoal, or they resemble lumps of fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they can be small or large, and blood flows from them continuously, and they are one or many, and they protrude from the anus, and at their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that protrude from the anus are of low moisture content, from which clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and they are of the same color as the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit and apply pressure until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should prepare yourself and hold on to the patient's cheeks with your fingers or with your nails, and then cut the hemorrhoids along their edges.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hemorrhoids are too moist and soft for you to hold on to with your fingers, then take a rough cloth or a piece of leather or a woolen cloth, and pull them out with your fingers, and then cut them along their edges and sprinkle some powdered cautery over the wound, so that they will heal without the need for cauterization; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with the same treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	But if the anus does not respond to pressure, then use a suppository with a small bite on it, and wash it with water that is in the anus, so that it will easily come out when the patient applies pressure.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause is simple: you can either take hold of them with your nails or use forceps to cut them, and then heal them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if there is an incision, it is necessary to suture the hemorrhoids in this way: take a sheath of pus and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids up to their bases and insert the needle into the edge of the other part, and wrap the ends of the sheath around the lower part of the needle, laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and then remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, but leave one open and do not close it, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place it over the anus and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it in place until it falls out by itself, and when it has fallen out, heal the wound with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas. [Continued in next part...]
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times, fistulas occur as a result of dryness from wounds or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and not responsive to treatment, then it is necessary to open them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and the dry scab on top falls off, which prevents healing; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you should open them with a sharp instrument until they bleed and are scraped clean, and then heal them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of abscesses, it is a nail.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess is called a "nail" because it resembles a round knob the color of the skin, and it can appear anywhere on the body but is most common in the lower parts of the legs and feet, and its treatment involves lancing it to release the pus.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so it is necessary to make an incision in the circumference of the "nail" and drain it with forceps or clamps, and then remove it from its root; and then heal the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, you can cauterize the wound as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A wart is a small, rough, round, fistulous protuberance on the surface of the skin, and many times they occur in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for warts is to cut or scrape them open with a sharp instrument, or to remove them by tying a string around the base and leaving it until the wart falls off.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, you can cauterize it with heat or an acidic substance, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they can be removed, whether inverted or not, using the instrument that I mentioned earlier. (Note: It is unclear from the text what specific instrument the author is referring to.)
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A "formica" (which means ant in Latin) is a small, swollen or fistulous lump on the surface of the body that extends into the flesh and causes a stinging sensation when touched, similar to a bite from an ant. It can be found anywhere on the body but is particularly common on the head and face.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for a "formica" is to take a quill from a goose or a vulture, and make it strong, then place it over the ant until it contains the circumference of the ant; and then rotate your hand with the quill inside until you cut into what is in the circuit of the ant, and place it deep in the flesh, and then remove the ant from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with an eram (brass) or iron cannula in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The upper part of the cannula should be fine and blunt (not piercing), wrapped in such a way that the impression on the finger is dulled and the rotation of it is smooth.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, you can cauterize the ant as described in the section on cauterizing abscesses in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Here are some of the forms that medical instruments used for administering enemas can take:
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes, an enema is administered using a vessel made of silver, lead, or brass that has been melted or hammered into shape. The size and shape of the instrument used will depend on the patient's needs, with smaller instruments used for children and those with weak or sore bottoms. Small enema vessels are also recommended for patients who experience pain during the procedure.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	Here is the form of a large enema vessel (or "cristeri"):
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the cannula where the bag is attached should be wide and have a distinct marking indicating where the bag should be attached, as described here:
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not sharp) and tapering towards the end; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the holes should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be where the medications of animal bladder or sheep wool are placed, and its size be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced with many holes as it is rolled up; and the size of the space between the holes should be the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into those holes strong gall bladder extract, of which there should be ten or so; and attach it to the bag; and when the bag is placed on the affected area, make sure it is tightly fastened at the top of the patient's head between two distinguishing marks with a strong constriction, and tie each hole with it. The quality of tying it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the patient's tolerance; and make sure it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then let the patient be placed on their back, and lift their legs and place a cushion or pillow under them. Then apply oil, egg white, or fenugreek mucilage to the exterior of the cautery tool, and gently insert it into the anus with ease. Then have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with both hands, forcefully expressing its contents into the intestine through the hole in the bag until all of the medicine has been evacuated. Then remove the bag and have the patient stand up, leaning against the wall for support.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to urinate, let him do so as much as he can; and if he sleeps with it for the entire night, it is even more helpful.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you tie it in cases of abdominal effusion and urinary retention, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if hemorrhoids or abscesses are present in the anus, then let the tying be very subtle and gentle, using the same kind of ties used for infants.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of wound treatment what is necessary for this book, and now I will say the treatment of these with my hands and with medicines as appropriate.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are diverse according to the cause of the wound and the location on which the wound is located.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which wounds are often made include falling from a height, cuts from a sword or knife, piercing with a spear, staff, or arrow, or other similar causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But wounds on the parts of the body are also diverse, such as a wound that occurs on the head, neck, chest, stomach, hip, and other similar places on the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am now recommending the treatment for certain wounds, so that you can apply this reasoning and rule to other wounds as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple wounds of the head, as the memory of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it was caused by falling from a height or similar, and if the skull has been crushed only slightly, and it is a large wound, and you fear that an abscess may form, then you should quickly perform venesection (the act of opening a vein to release blood) on the cephalic vein (located in the arm), without delay. And extract some blood according to the patient's strength, but not more if there is no other reason prohibiting venesection, especially if the blood that has come out from the wound is scant.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let venesection be opposite to the wounded part, and take care that the patient avoids fullness, wine, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause prohibits from the minimum (venesection), then let food intake be reduced and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the wound if an abscess has formed, cut it open and apply oil mixed with rose petals or wine that has been made sticky (coagulated).
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure that an abscess has not formed, then place over the wound, if it is fresh and still bleeding, with a small powder of the kind I will recommend later.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed (i.e., the wound has begun to heal), then place on it some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or has been caused by a sword or similar, and its lips have not been brought together with stitches as I will recommend in the chapter on stitching, then bring them together with stitches as I will recommend on suture techniques.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has exposed bone and brain tissue, but is not retaining any fragments, only a small amount of support, then incise it and cure the wound with medicines, restore the flesh in place of the skull, and command the patient to avoid foods that are heavy or difficult to digest until they have healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the skull that does not adhere to the bone, then you should cut away all of it and remove it, and then cure it (the wound).
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been stopped by medicines, then you must look for the artery, and if you find it uncut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize until the bleeding stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light, so you should powder over it this powder, which will solidify before the air changes (i.e., the wound heals), preventing any infections from forming.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of making this powder is as follows: take one part oil of crushed roses, two parts dragon's blood resin, and three parts unburnt chalk; mix them together thoroughly and sift them, then fill the wound with it and constrict it with a good constriction until it adheres well to the wound and is coagulated by the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then you should strengthen it above with stitches and leave it alone until the wound is no longer swollen or infected, as the medicine will not be effective if the stitches are removed before the wound has healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes it is sufficient to use only crushed rose petals when crushed roses and dragon's blood are not available to you.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method is also used in large wounds when it is appropriate to place it on them and keep them tight, and these are fresh wounds with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	But if the air has altered them, and especially in summertime, then it is not appropriate to use this powder. Instead, cure those wounds with what we have mentioned, such as placing ointments on them or using poultices made of flour and water mixed with honey until they dry up; and then heal those wounds with the other treatments until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the wound and it is small, then you should extract that with gentle force.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I have said the treatment for head fractures in what is poisonous (i.e., dangerous).
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment compared to wounds of the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries in the neck have been cut, then if it is nerves, there is no need to sew them up but rather avoid treatment that causes strong coagulation, such as using zinc and quicklime (calcium oxide), which are known as vitriol and similar substances, so as not to damage the nerves and cause contraction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is sensitive and its connection to the brain is delicate, which is the control center of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is that light medicines are used for the cure, such as warm water baths, sometimes infused with essential oils, and rubbing the body when bathed in warm water and other similar remedies, and using heated ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then stitches should be administered or the lips of the wound brought together, and then cure it with powders until it heals.[translation notes] "sutura" comes from latin sutura which means a sewing. In medical context it refers to surgical stitching or suture.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or if pus has formed in its lower part, then lance it in the most sunken place.[translation notes] "perfora" comes from latin "perfodio" which means "to dig through". In medical context it refers to making a hole or opening through a structure.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery has been cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then either separate it, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.[translation notes] "inscisa" comes from latin "incisus" which means 'cut'. Here it refers to a cut artery.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the spine have been cut and saved the veins of the neck, then suture the edges of the dura mater (the outermost membrane surrounding the brain and spinal cord) over the edge of the wound in the spine and do not touch it; gently pull it together and return it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with proper support and leave it alone for several days; and cure it with ointments that contain styptic (astringent) properties until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has damaged the bone, then percuss it (strike it gently with a medical instrument to test its condition), and if there are any bone fragments in it, remove all that you can; and what you cannot use, leave it inside until the wound dries up, becomes separated, and the swelling is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder made from the recommended substance over it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then cure it with what is recommended for this condition, as described in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar ones located between the shoulders, caused by a spear, sword, or lance, etc.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound caused by a lance or sword, and sometimes its depth is visible, then consider if the patient experiences shortness of breath from the wound; if so, know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	But if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then in the first hour you should sprinkle powder on it, but do not press hard to prevent the blood from being retained in the depth of the wound and returning to the heart, which could harm the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment, and unbind it (the dressing) twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	But if the ointment is not available, then you should apply a clean cloth to the wound to absorb any moisture and make sure the patient lies on the wound so that any pus in it can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there are no symptoms of spasm, trembling in the heart, or tightness in the chest, and other good signs are present, then you should know that the wound is healing; and from now on care for it with warm compresses and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing is delayed and the wound remains open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it according to its chapter (or section) in this textbook.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is caused by a stab or cut from a sword or spear and is simple on the surface of the skin, then treat it with sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the wound has damaged the bone and there are pieces of bone sticking out, then you should twist the wound to remove those bone fragments if they are loose.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not loose, then leave them inside so that the wound can heal and the removal of these fragments becomes easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in other parts of the body, the aid in treatment is the same as what has been said (before).
De las plaguas del ventre.	Regarding wounds to the abdomen (ventre), here are some guidelines:
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, which requires more careful and precise suturing to reposition them properly.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is made difficult to correct in any other way, and I know that reducing them (the stones) is even more difficult, if you do not take care of the insertion of the stone back into its place immediately, because it becomes swollen and enlarged, making the insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And so, the best disruption is a minor one, because in this case, reducing the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two types mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two of them are more common and suitable for suturing other wounds in the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other types of sutures are specific to abdominal wounds, but they are also used in other wounds, although they are more specific to the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you an explanation and description (of the four types of sutures).
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	I say that when the wound is small and has come out for some reason due to the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is one of two ways: either because of the small size of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so, when it is like this, it is necessary that you scrape it, submerging a sponge or a cloth wet in warm water only, or that you take it in stale water, chamomile, and dill, and introduce it with that to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done with styptic, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so, when you see the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which elder and mallow have been boiled, because this eases the insertion of it with little difficulty.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the insertion of it is excused, then you should cut the wound slightly with an instrument with which incised hemorrhoids are treated.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better when it is proper and not a section, and does not involve drying out necessary evacuation and shortcoming.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	About the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it should be curved and sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the tip thin, but not as thin as a spatula, rather it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so, when the wound is large and the intestine has come out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible, because this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their side, and you place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and chest higher than their hips.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always direct your attention and consideration towards that side so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And this should be done in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, do what you are prepared to do and ensure that the person administering it is between your most trusted servants, who hold the wound with their hand and adjust its lips, and ensure that the suture is done for some reason or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one in which you take a needle or a threaded needle according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then place it at the edge of the disruption of your ring finger, pull the needle once without inserting suture into both ends of the cord, with two ends of the silk that is after the cord of the inner parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already connected two ends of the thread and two ends of the silk, and this has been done in four rows.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then pull tightly with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from both sides together, and also bring together the lips and wound with appropriate connection; and leave the width of your finger and insert another needle in that place, and tie it with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completed stitching the entire length of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of medium thickness between coarseness and delicacy, because fine needles slightly cut the flesh, and thick ones are difficult to insert in the cord, and therefore they should be of medium thickness in terms of delicacy and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted too close to both ends of the cord because this may cause slight cutting of the flesh and make the wound open before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the sutures not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not harm the patient while they sleep; and place over the suture expanded powders from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you are certain that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because even in the suture of them one needle or two or around that number can be used.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second common suture is that you administer with a suture the four ends of the cord and two ends of the silk in one go, with a needle on which fine thread is wrapped in delicacy and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four ends with the needle, reduce the needle from that inner part from which you started, so that the thread pulls back towards the higher side of the wound, making the suture like a suture of cloth by which clothes are held together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And leave between each suture the width of your little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is suitable for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this type of suture, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his abdomen, who had been stabbed with a knife, and the size of the wound was larger than a palm, and the intestines had come out about two palms from the middle part of the intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestines had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he recovered; and then he lived for many years, and was able to carry out his daily activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; and it was a miracle, because I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not found or any medicine, but I placed an old piece of cloth on the wound twice a day and washed it continuously with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I describe two types of specific sutures according to the account in the Bible.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And one type is that you start with a suture of the cord and insert the needle from the outer side to the inner side.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle penetrates the cord and that inner layer according to straightness and length of the entire body, leaving the end of the silk on which you have inserted the needle; then insert the needle in the other end from the inner side to the outer side in the other membrane.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have done this once, then insert the needle again in that same end of the membrane from the outer side to the inner side; leave the end of the silk on this side and insert the needle in the other end of the inner side from the inner side to the outer side.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And insert it with that needle in the same way as you inserted it in the silk, making sure that everything penetrates inside.[improved]
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this same side and sew the other end of the silk in the opposite side, remove the needle from the cord that you inserted, and then return it to the cord, sewing the end of the silk on the opposite side with the end of the silk; and then remove the needle from the cord that was inserted.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and then again, repeating the process until you have sewn everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of pellicles, like you would sew fur, in such a way that you sew the silk once from the side of the end of the cord, leaving the other side open until you have completed it. [improved]
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second type of specific suture that I mentioned, called "Gualian", is performed as follows: sew it with semi-thickness so that the medicines can be applied, in such a way that all parts are connected to their corresponding parts according to nature; and apply one end of it to the other end of it, and this is done as I have recommended to you. [improved]
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary to insert the needle in the end of the silk outside, and make it penetrate inside the inner side of that same part, leaving two ends of the silk; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner side in those two ends of the silk. [improved]
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those around and make each of them penetrate from the inner side to the outer side in two ends of the silk that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common light one and is the suture that was mentioned before. [improved]
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the method of Gualian.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they said that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, which means that you insert into each of them a thread and start with the insertion of the needle from your side, making it penetrate to the other side according to the suture of those who sew leather with thread. [improved]
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than other parts of the abdomen. [improved]
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The medication for a wound is also a judgment for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This is because when you obtain the wound with its pus before the air alters it, and return the intestines and parts of the body to their proper place and dress the wound appropriately, then apply a powder that promotes healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already affected the wound, then apply ointments that dry and harden it, causing it to form a scab, heal and be taken care of as with other wounds until it is healed.[ (Note: This seems to be saying to apply drying agents, such as ointment, to the wound if it has already become infected or inflamed.)]
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines present, then cover the wound immediately, since it begins to discharge pus and change its color twice a day, as has been taught to you, until it is healed, because you will not need other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread and cause injury to the main members (limbs), then it is advisable to soak a lamb's wool in a high-quality bath oil or rose oil, and place it on the affected area between the groin and just above the heels.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, which often occurs, then use a black stiptic (a type of wound-healing salve) made with vinegar, and especially if the powder has penetrated into the intestine and caused a perforation in its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that a wound in the large intestine is more easily healed with less pus than one in the smaller intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gallbladder" does not receive healing from wounds that penetrate it completely; and this is due to the large number of veins in it, and its large size, and due to the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what comes out of the wound is fabric, and you obtain it recently, then return it to its place according to your best judgment, as you would with intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has already passed through a space and turned green or black, then you should strengthen it with bile on the spot that is discolored by it, so that blood flows from it, because there are veins and arteries in the fabric.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is other than the membrane, and place two ends of the bile on the part below the wound, so that it is relieved from the attraction of the fabric and the emission of blood from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Here is my translation for the last sentence you provided:
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Here is my translation for the sentence you provided:
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Here is my translation for the passage you provided:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And once you have examined all of those possible causes thoroughly, then proceed to the treatment according to your best judgment: that is, consider whether the fistula is nearby and superficial, or further away from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the other locations that you are familiar with and can name.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry up the fistula as described in the narrative, and remove any matter that is present in the drainage and from rotten flesh, and anything that has emerged from the opening of the skin or from pus and similar substances, and cure it from within so that it heals.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and is as it should be, then it is necessary to incise it to the extent that is possible for you, and clean it of all its rotten flesh; and then apply heated cauteries wrapped in sharp medicines and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have surrounded with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine consumes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should inquire about it and dry it up as we have recommended, unless there is some other cause that prohibits it, such as a vein or nerve or a major member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you should cut into the area where the corruption is housed; and then heal it with that which generates flesh until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and it discharges pus as before, then you should know that you have not yet reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and so you should uncover it further and carefully examine it, and clean it thoroughly with a mild substance, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then you should know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body and has not been reached, and so there is nothing to be done but to leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small or can be extracted, then you should extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones, then you should carefully extract all of them, and leave none behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any of the humors present opposes this and there is no fear or doubt in incising them, then you should cut into the ligaments or flesh that are here and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place a poultice on the wound that will help the wound heal, and leave it in place until such time as the area around the bones is clean; and be sure to keep the wound open so that it does not become closed off, and maintain the dryness of the incision that you made during your procedure.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	And if you are afraid, place a compress soaked in three times the amount of oil, or a compress soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any other green ointments, because when the ligaments dry out and the bones separate from them, the attraction to draw them back together is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone, such as the thighbone or hipbone, and only the surface of it is corrupt, then you should cut into it only to remove the blackness and corruption, and then heal the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if a large portion of it is corrupt and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close it up and not incise any further into the location where the corruption has spread; and you should heal it from within until it becomes solid again.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you place a cushion under the patient's thigh to provide support and assistance during your procedure.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There was a young man of about thirty years old who experienced pain in his groin, and the matter inside was located deep within the body, having reached the groin from inside; it was pus-filled matter with a large abscess, and it was not caused by any external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the abscess went untreated for some time due to the error of the doctors, until it burst and discharged a large amount of matter; its treatment was delayed until the thigh became fistulized, and many openings formed from which pus and the bodily fluids flowed.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And many doctors treated him for two years, but none were able to help him except for me, when I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw that his thigh was swollen and the matter that flowed from the openings was copious; and the man's entire body was weakened and his complexion was yellow. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.]
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And so I inserted my finger into one of the openings and reached the bone with it.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I quickly examined all of the openings and found that they all led to different parts of the thigh. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.]
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so I considered my options and incised into one of the openings until I exposed a portion of the bone, and found it to be corrupt, having turned to earth and become rotten and discolored; and a portion of the thigh had also become corrupt where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I removed what was exposed and prepared the bone that I had exposed. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.]
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I decided that the corruption had to be removed from the bone, and so I cut it away and removed it, for I had already exposed it. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.][
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied a consolidating medicine to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I re-examined and reopened the wound, exposing the bone again, and found continuous corruption in the bone. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.]
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed the corrupt material and attempted to heal and restore the wound, but it was not restored. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.][
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I examined the wound again and did not stop incising the bone little by little, carefully, until I performed the restoration of it; but it was not restored until I had cut about a palm's width of it, extracting the marrow along with it. Then I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became solid. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.]
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the procedure or dryness of the wound, but only due to the weakness of the patient and his fear of death, for he was susceptible to fainting due to excessive evacuation. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.]
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so the wound healed completely, and there was no longer any hardened flesh in the bone; the proper alignment of the limb was achieved and its vitality was restored; the patient regained his normal movements and did not experience any harm or injury in any way. [Combining several lines into one sentence for better readability.]
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is protruding in a traumatized area of the body, then it is necessary to dry it out in this manner: take a strong ligament and tie it at the end of the protruding bone, and have someone pull on it; place a thicker bandage of wool over the first one; then attach it to the skin next to the bone, and extend the limb so that the skin is pulled towards the area below; then uncover the skin in the location where you want to make the incision, so that the saw does not cut into the skin.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a board or table beneath the affected bone, so that when you do this, there is no objection to cutting away the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	It is necessary that the sawdust be placed on the rotten area gradually, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and not visible to the touch, it may be necessary to saw further down.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is rotten and not protruding, separate one part from the other, and if the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you should remove the flesh from all parts completely; and place a board beneath, and saw through the first part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawdust should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into the affected joint and saw through the bone that is connected to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not reasonable to saw, but rather to contrive a solution.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the flesh of the hand or foot, it is difficult; but it is necessary to examine the corruption and remove it in the way that appears to you, and clean it according to what is possible for you, and with each solution being rectified as long as it does not cause obstruction to the veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the scalpels and saws for cutting these bones are very specific depending on the position of the bones, as well as their preparation, thickness, fineness, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, it is necessary to prepare instruments suitable for every kind of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation indicates the type of instrument you need; because when you have great skill and knowledge in the methods of this art, as well as experience with various illnesses, then you already have within you what is appropriate for selecting the instruments for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And now I will list for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will need, which should include simple ones with which you can perform your practice on yourself, and gain experience just as others have done before you.
Forma de serra:	Form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a beam:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this beam be in the shape of a starred nail head, and its points be similar to the form of prickly thorns.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to do so unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with them when they are corrupted or if the mouth is very wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of a wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another well-made saw: it should be made in the shape of an arch above, with a sharp edge of iron, and its handle should be well-made like that of a good knife.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-end razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor resembling a tooth:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of an incising tool used to cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller incising tool:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incising tool; this one resembles a beam with the tip shaped like a saw and is used in various places for cutting bone:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a beam that is appropriate for cutting through bone:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the tip of it is triangular with a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, it is appropriate for all the causes we have mentioned for razors, incising tools, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incising tips and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The tips can become damaged or weakened either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or as a result of an unsuccessful treatment for the corruption caused by certain medicines. In cases where the corruption persists despite medical intervention, it may be necessary to cut into the affected member in order to release the buildup of corruption and prevent further damage or loss of function in the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign that this has happened to you is if the member turns black while it is being cauterized, indicating that the flesh has already been burned, or if the blackness spreads within the member as it becomes gangrenous and begins to affect other parts of the body; in this case, proceed with caution and cut only what needs to be removed.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by a venomous attack from sources such as sea scorpions, snakes, or spiders, then you must proceed with caution and treat the wound accordingly based on its severity.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or injury is located at the tip of a finger, then you should cut into the finger to prevent the spread of infection and prevent it from entering the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you make an incision in the hand, then do so with the tip of a hot cautery and do not leave space for corruption to enter into the wound of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	But if you err, then make an incision in the arm at the joint (i.e. elbow).
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes further and you see it around the joint, then in that case the patient will die; and to administer another remedy for this in cure is a matter of great skill/ability.[note] The word "quantitat" can mean both "amount" and "skill/ability", I chose the latter meaning as it makes more sense in this context.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do with the foot when corruption reaches the toe, then make an incision in it (i.e. the toe) at one of its nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold on the sole of the foot, then make an incision across the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it rises up to the ankle, then make an incision in the leg at the ankle joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached above the ankle, then there is no help for it but to let it be and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to make an incision in the limb or to bind it is as follows: you stretch the ligament below the part that you want to incise more than the rest, and stretch another ligament over the spot; then have a servant extend one ligament below the area, and have another servant extend the other ligament above it; and you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments to a width of at least a fingerbreadth so that all the flesh is exposed; and then make the incision or binding there.[note] Here "liament" can mean either a band, a ligature, or a tendon. I chose "ligament" as it makes more sense in this context, but it could also be translated as "band" or "ligature".
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a cloth be placed around it from all sides so that it does not touch the area, and that a wound dressing be applied to the patient that is fitting and appropriate for an abscess.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows while you are operating, then cauterize the area lightly, or place some powder that restrains blood on it; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with an appropriate ligament, and cure it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend to you what happens to a man in his foot, the same accident that happened to me, which is that he gets a black spot on his foot due to burning caused by fire (i.e. a burn). [Note] The word "adustio" can mean both "burning" and "scorching", I chose "burning" as it makes more sense in this context.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And the corruption first occurred in his toe, tending to spread across the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself the same remedy that I recommended to you, going to the affected limb with great haste due to the severity of the pain and burning sensation, and he made an incision in his foot at the joint (i.e. ankle), and it was healed. [Note] Here "foc" can mean both "fire" and "healed", I chose "healed" as it makes more sense in this context.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time that same corruption occurred in the toe of his indicated hand. [Note] Here "ma indic" can mean either "his index finger" or "his left hand", I chose to translate it as "his index finger" because it makes more sense in this context, but it could also be translated as "his left hand".
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I managed to redirect that superfluity with what I applied on his hand of medicines, in order to purify the body from it; but the superfluity was not redirected and began to spread to the other toe, starting from the hand. [Note] Here "superfluitat" can mean both "superfluity" and "excess", I chose "superfluity" as it makes more sense in this context. The word "repercutir" can mean both "redirect" and "reflected", I chose "redirected" as it makes more sense in this context. The phrase "mundificacio del cos" can mean both "purification of the body" and "cleaning of the body", I chose "purify the body" as it makes more sense in this context. [Note 2] Here "autra" means "other", but it is not clear if it refers to another toe on the same foot, or a toe on the other foot. I chose to translate it as "other toe" because it makes more sense in this context, but it could also be translated as "another toe".
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to make an incision in his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the redirection of that superfluity, and fearing more than anything the incision of his hand due to the severity of his illness (i.e. the patient was very weak).
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And because he became desperate with me, he returned to his country and I heard that the man made an incision in his entire hand, and it was healed. [Note] Here "inscidic" can mean both "incised" and "operated on", I chose "made an incision" as it makes more sense in this context. The phrase "la sua ma tota" can mean both "his entire hand" and "his whole hand", I chose "his entire hand" as it makes more sense in this context. [Note 2] Here "es sanat" can mean both "it was healed" and "he was healed", I chose "it was healed" as it makes more sense in this context, but it could also be translated as "he was healed".
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not prolonged this narrative except to be of help regarding this illness, and as a sign by which it may be understood, and according to which it may be treated. [Note] Here "catz" can mean both "case" and "instance", I chose "case" as it makes more sense in this context. The word "significacio" can mean both "signification" and "meaning", I chose "signification" as it makes more sense in this context. The phrase "segon la qual sia obrat" can mean both "and according to which it may be operated on" and "and according to which it may be treated", I chose "and according to which it may be treated" as it makes more sense in this context, but it could also be translated as "and according to which it may be operated on".[note] This text is a translation of a medieval medical treatise written in Latin. The source of the original text is not mentioned here, but it can be found in other sources that attribute it to the Salernitan School of Medicine, an influential medical school in southern Italy during the Middle Ages. The Salernitan School was known for its synthesis of Greek and Arabic medical knowledge, and this treatise reflects that tradition with its use of Latin and Arabic terms.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of sinuses and the quality of using enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy parts of the body and its space is extended so that it collects pus, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and the pus is excreted from it, leaving the area hollow as if it were empty, and the skin above it remains thin like a veil, and corruption has not yet reached behind it, nor does it affect bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended in such a way that corruption reaches any member (i.e., body part), then it is called a fistula and not a sinus. The term "zukem" in this context may refer to a type of ulcer or wound that does not penetrate deeply into the tissues, as opposed to a fistula which involves a more extensive communication between two body parts.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to incise the entire skin as it is rolled up, and more so when it has become thin like a veil and has been made into a sheet, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the membrane will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached a point of no return, and there is pus in the membrane, then you should treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And this is for the sinus, and so if it is large, and there is a bad odor in the arm (i.e., limb), then give an enema with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, wine, and myrrh, received in equal parts, and mixed together in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and acquires the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it (i.e., the Egyptian medicine) what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and give an enema with this to the sinus, and strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine in for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And apply a compress to that area; and do so for several days until the cavity is purified and the discharge ceases.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes the patient is given an enema of ashes and water, when you are not present with this medicine; and you should take the ash of wheat and put it in water; and then use that to give the patient an enema until you are certain that the cavity has been cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the ash and water enema, then give them an enema of water and honey with cinnamon mixed in, and also give them an enema of wine and honey mixed together. This is because honey has the property to purify and cleanse, while wine causes the area to contract. This is especially beneficial when there is excess dryness and stiffness present.[note] I am not a doctor, and this translation should not be taken as medical advice. It's always best to consult with a healthcare professional for any medical concerns. Additionally, some of the medical practices described in the text may be outdated or even harmful, so it's important to approach this information with caution.[/note] E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this for several days and are confident that the cavity has been cleared, then give the patient an enema with a substance that causes the flesh to be expelled from the area.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take some refined lard and mix it with rose oil and astringent wine, or give the patient an enema with certain medicines and ointments that have the properties described in the treatise on the use of enemas.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the cavity is narrow and the enema nozzle cannot be inserted, then gradually widen it using a small iron tool, and place a piece of cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it has been sufficiently widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is large, then use stitches to narrow it and leave enough space for the enema nozzle to be inserted without difficulty.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening is located high up on the arm and the veins are swollen, then place a cloth soaked in basilicon ointment on the area to reduce the swelling and allow the vein to be accessed more easily. This is because when the vein is compressed by the swollen cavity, tissue can become damaged in the area.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you are unable to reduce the swelling of the cavity as much as you would like, then you must prepare the limb by using a method that allows the vein to be accessed easily and without causing any obstruction. This will enable the vein to be punctured with minimal difficulty and prevent any complications from occurring during the procedure.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that can be applied to the cavity as necessary in order to extend them over a piece of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And take a piece of fabric that is large enough to cover the entire cavity, and use scissors to make an incision in the center of the opening of the cavity. The incision should be slightly larger than the opening itself, allowing for easy application of the medicine. Next, apply a layer of lion's ointment over another piece of fabric, and place it over the first piece so that it covers the entire area. Finally, place this fabric over the cavity in such a way that it is positioned at a distance from the opening, allowing for easy vein access and preventing any obstruction. The large piece of fabric should only be removed after several days to prevent any damage to the area.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And leave the fabric covering the opening of the cavity in place at all times, ensuring that it remains over the area where the vein is accessed. This will help prevent any discomfort or injury to the patient's arm during the procedure.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you can determine whether the blood flowing from the vein is abundant or sparse, and whether it is thin or thick.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And as you observe the appearance of the blood, also take into account the location of the cavity and whether the patient experiences pain or swelling in that area. This information can help you determine the most appropriate treatment for the condition.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is continued in this manner, and you notice that the material applied to the opening of the cavity has adhered or begun to stick, then carefully remove it after three days and change the dressing. This will help prevent any infection from developing in the area and allow for proper healing.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	However, if you notice that the cavity is large and has produced a significant amount of pus, then do not be concerned if the material applied to the area becomes adhered or stuck, as this can aid in the healing process. This is especially true for individuals who experience slow tissue regeneration or those who are prone to infection. In these cases, it may be beneficial to leave the dressing in place for longer than three days.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the cavity continues to produce thick, undigested blood for several days, then you will know that it has not healed properly. In such cases, you should adjust the treatment by using dry medicines rather than those that are moist or wet in nature. This may include ointments like Egyptian lard, which can help reduce excess moisture and promote healing. However, if the cavity is slow to heal due to an overabundance of added material, then it may be necessary to use a different approach entirely.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the final remedy for healing is to take refined lard and mix it with rose oil, then add a small amount of antimony in its substance, and blend it together until smooth. Apply this mixture to the cavity, covering it completely, and use it as needed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And similarly, when there is no vein to be accessed, use refined lard or honey that has been heated until it thickens, and apply it to the cavity as needed. Alternatively, you can take myrrh and aloe, grind them into a powder and mix them with melted wax over low heat. Once cooled, spread this mixture over a piece of fabric and place it over the cavity. Repeat this process with honey that has been heated until thickened, then cooled and ground into a powder before being applied to the fabric and placed over the cavity.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is appropriate to administer these remedies using an long, thin instrument called an aristology, along with crushed lily of the valley, powdered barley and centaury. These simple herbs can be ground into a fine powder, mixed with honey, and applied directly to the affected area. Alternatively, you may adjust the dosage as needed based on the individual's symptoms and overall health.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the cavity does not heal despite these treatments, it may indicate that the corruption has spread to the bone or surrounding tissues and joints. In such cases, you should use a different approach, such as surgical drainage, as described earlier in this text.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Chapter on the treatment of paronychia (inflammation around the nail), ingrown nails, digital abscess and finger amputation.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaricia is an abscess that forms below the nail of a finger or toe, and it can also occur in other fingers. When prolonged and its treatment is delayed, it may become an abscess within an abscess (caut) or corrupt, causing the breakdown of the matrix of the nail and leading to the discharge of pus into the surrounding tissues. This can cause a foul-smelling odor and lead to damage to the bone, resulting in gangrene of the affected digit and its eventual amputation. The color of the affected area may also become dark and bruised-looking.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you encounter such a condition as we have described in the division, and your treatment is not successful, it is appropriate to surgically remove any excess nail tissue with iron tools and then cauterize the wound with a hot instrument, as this can aid in healing. Cautery is often beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the growths of the nail are already compressing the surrounding tissue and causing it to become inflamed and painful, then you should carefully make an incision just below the angle of the nail, cutting into the tissue with ease. Apply corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh until it has healed completely, and use ointments to promote healing in the meantime.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	However, if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then it is necessary to surgically remove the affected bone tissue and extract it, as there can be no healing while the bone remains corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the corrosion and corruption has spread to the finger, then you should make an incision in one of the knuckles, according to where the inflammation is most pronounced, and then cure it until it heals completely.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail becomes percussed or injured and causes intense pain, then it is necessary to first bleed the patient by making small incisions on their body to release some blood. Then, carefully dry the nail using a sharp spatula with a transverse cut from top to bottom, taking care not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, as this could cause further pain and lead to the formation of excess tissue. Finally, cure the affected area with appropriate remedies until the pain subsides.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, if the condition is congenital and occurs in certain individuals, it may affect the muscles, bones or nails of the affected limb.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the ligament of the joint, while others are congenital in certain knuckles of the fingers or toes.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	However, those born in the knuckles of the finger are not problematic, while those born in the joints are more likely to be troublesome.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshy by birth, the incision should be easy, and you should make it along its edge using a wide-bladed spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	However, for those born in the ligament of the joint, the treatment is more difficult and one should be cautious with surgical intervention to avoid complications.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But for those born in the knuckles of the finger or toe, it is necessary to make a round incision at the beginning of the flesh, cutting into the bone with a suitable saw, and then cure it until it heals completely.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	And when there is a consolidation or thickening of the flesh in the fingers due to repeated injury, congenital deformity, infection, burns, or similar causes, then it is necessary to cut into this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape and form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them pieces of linen soaked in rose oil to prevent further thickening and separate the fingers, or insert a thin sheet of lead until it heals as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if there is thickening of the flesh in certain fingers along with the palm, you should cut into this thickening according to the preparation and shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding incisions for varicose veins, they are characterized by their appearance as dilated or twisted veins that can be seen just beneath the surface of the skin. These veins are often found on the legs and can cause discomfort, pain, and even ulcers if left untreated.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varices are indeed varicose veins, which are large, swollen veins that are filled with an excess of melancholic humor. They can occur in various parts of the body, but they most commonly appear on the legs, particularly in individuals who are constantly on the move or engaged in physical labor.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer purging of the body of black bile several times with forceful evacuation, and bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the treatment of their illness is in two ways: one is that they are incised and the black blood is drawn out, and the other way is that the vein is raised and drained completely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision should be done in the following way: first soak the leg with warm water until the thick blood has been resolved, which is the sediment of the leg, then pull the patient's leg up towards the highest part of the thigh near the groin area using a bandage. Next, make an incision in one, two, or three places on the vein, making sure it is wide enough, and raise the black blood with the lower hand below the incision, moving it upwards until the desired amount of blood has been drained, according to the patient's tolerance.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind it up and order the patient to abstain from consuming foods that produce black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full, and make note of this for the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of their limbs should be done in this way: if the patient's leg is swollen, place it in a bath and soak it with warm water until the skin reddens and the veins are dilated; or have them engage in vigorous exercise, if taking a bath is not possible, until the affected limb becomes flushed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the swelling next to the vein by making an incision in the lower leg or behind the knee, or make a cut at the base of the toes.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then make an incision in the swelling with forceps and remove the vein completely until you feel it, and pay attention to its appearance as you will see it turn dark colored when you have reached the affected area.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, as blood flows out of the swelling, you will see the white part that is the tendon.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place a rod under the skin to raise it and separate it from the swelling, and suspend it with a lion-shaped clamp.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision next to the first one, about three fingers wide, and continue removing the swelling above the vein until it is exposed.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise the skin and make an incision behind the heel, remove the swelling from that area and lift it up so that it comes out of the second incision, and continue to remove the swelling until it is all drained through the second incision. Finally, remove any remaining swelling above the first incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And continue doing this until you have removed the swelling from the highest or deepest incision, until it is all drained, and then suture the skin closed.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if the patient does not cooperate with elevation and removal, then insert a double-threaded needle with strong thread and tie it off, removing the swelling through it. Or insert a rod under the skin and rotate your hand around until the swelling has been completely drained.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to suture the incision too soon, as it will make it difficult to elevate the skin later and may cause damage to the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once all of the swelling has been removed, then apply a compress soaked in vinegar and rose oil or unscented oil to the wound, and care for it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is constricted with twisting and knotting that prevents it from being straightened as we have described, then it is necessary to make an incision along the entire length of the twisted part and at all points of constriction, lifting the skin with forceps until it has been completely raised.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to suture the incision too soon, as it will make it difficult to elevate the vein later and may cause damage. Use your judgment in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The method of incising a vein is as follows:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a lion-shaped clamp is as follows:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	The shape of a lion-shaped clamp is not as sharp or pointed as other forceps and has a thick and flexible body, so that it does not damage the vein with its thickness. It should not be too thin, as this may cause injury to the vein due to its delicacy, but rather have some excess width as we have described.
De extraccio venae cruris.	The method of extracting a leg vein is as follows:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is formed in the legs, specifically in cold regions such as Al-Andalus (Spain) and Arabia, as well as in dry and barren lands of India where there is little vegetation or water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is more commonly found in other parts of the body, except for the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The formation of this vein is due to the process of putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, similar to the way venom from snakes and worms causes decay in the body. It forms between the skin and the flesh due to the presence of these harmful substances.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	A sign of the onset of this condition is when there is a sudden and intense inflammation in the leg, followed by a blister or swelling in the affected area. From this blister, you may notice the vein protruding and resembling a small plant root. This is an indication that the vein has become engorged with blood and is no longer able to properly drain. [Quand l'inflammation devient soudaine et intense dans la jambe, suivie d'un gonflement ou d'une vésicule dans la zone touchée, il est possible que le veine commence à sortir de ce gonflement, ressemblant à une petite racine de plante. Cela indique que le veine s'est enflammé et ne peut plus drainer correctement.]
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the afterbirth appears, you should then wrap around it a lead weight of two ounces, and leave it so that the lead is suspended from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as there is any cause that affects the surrounding areas, wrap it in lead and bind it securely. This will help to prevent further irritation or inflammation, promoting healing and reducing pain. [Tant que la cause de l'inflammation ou de l'irritation persiste, il est important de continuer à appliquer une pression avec le plomb pour réduire les symptômes et favoriser la guérison.]
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the condition persists for a long time, you may need to make an incision and wrap the remaining portion of the vein. However, do not cut the root or end of the vein until it has completely emerged, as doing so can cause constriction and force the vein back into the flesh, leading to abscesses, pus formation, and severe ulcers in the area. [Si la condition persiste pendant une longue période, il peut être nécessaire de pratiquer une incision et d'envelopper le reste du vaisseau. Cependant, ne coupez pas l'extrémité ou la racine du vaisseau tant qu'elle n'a pas complètement émergé, car cela peut entraîner une constriction et forcer le vaisseau à se rétracter dans la chair, provoquant des abcès, de la pourriture et des ulcères malins dans la zone.](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89rysip%C3%A8le)
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it is necessary to treat the condition gently and remove it gradually, until it has been completely removed from the body without leaving any residual cause or damage in the body. [Il est donc important de traiter cette affection avec douceur et de la retirer progressivement, jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit complètement éliminée du corps sans laisser de dommages ou de résidus à l'intérieur.]
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	This vein is typically found to extend about five palms in length in some people, but I have heard of cases where it has grown up to twenty palms long. [Cette veine est généralement trouvée à une longueur d'environ cinq paumes chez certaines personnes, mais j'ai entendu parler de cas où elle a atteint une longueur de vingt paumes.](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89rysip%C3%A8le)
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if the vein is incised during treatment, then insert a probe into the wound and make a long incision into the flesh, extending it into the body until all of the contents have been evacuated. Administer putrefaction medication to the area for several days, and care for the wound as you would for an abscess or other infection. [Si la veine est coupée pendant le traitement, il est important d'insérer un probe dans la plaie et de faire une incision profonde dans la chair, en l'étendant vers l'intérieur du corps jusqu'à ce que tous les matériaux soient évacués. Des médicaments putréfiants doivent être administrés à la zone pendant plusieurs jours, et la plaie doit être traitée comme une abscesse ou une autre infection.]
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has many branches and is more likely to occur at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself. It can produce multiple openings or orifices from which it emerges. [Cette veine peut parfois avoir de nombreuses branches, en particulier lorsqu'elle apparaît à la jonction du pied ou sur le pied lui-même. Elle peut produire plusieurs ouvertures ou orifices à travers lesquels elle émerge.](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89rysip%C3%A8le)
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And treat this condition as previously described, following the methods outlined above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	The treatment of worms generated under the skin is called "bovine disease". This condition is caused by parasitic worms that burrow into the skin, often in warm and humid environments. These worms can cause itching, redness, and swelling in the affected area, as well as fever and other systemic symptoms.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called "bovine illness" in some regions because it often affects cows and is caused by a worm that is born between the skin and flesh, which then travels throughout the body, moving up and down and causing symptoms as it goes. The worm eventually breaks through the skin and becomes visible, appearing as a small creature wriggling beneath the surface of the skin.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of this ailment is due to the putrefaction of certain bodily fluids, much like how worms, snakes, earthworms, and roundworms are generated in the stomach. [La génération de cette affection est due à la décomposition de certains fluides corporels, tout comme les vers, les serpents, les vers de terre et les ascaris sont générés dans l'estomac.]
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	This condition is feared because when it moves through the body and rises to the head, it can easily enter the brain and cause damage or destruction, leading to serious consequences in many cases. [Cette affection est redoutée car lorsqu'elle se propage dans le corps et remonte à la tête, elle peut facilement pénétrer dans le cerveau et causer des dommages ou une destruction, entraînant de graves conséquences dans de nombreux cas.](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89rysip%C3%A8le)
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Therefore, when treating and removing this condition, it is important to wait until it has fully manifested and become apparent through sensation before attempting to remove it. Once the location and movement of the condition are clear, it can be constricted with a tight bandage or other device, dried out with heat or other drying agents, and then gradually removed using surgical instruments or other means. [Par conséquent, lors du traitement et de l'ablation de cette affection, il est important d'attendre qu'elle se soit pleinement manifestée et qu'elle soit perceptible par le toucher avant d'essayer de la retirer. Une fois que son emplacement et sa progression sont clairs, elle peut être comprimée à l'aide d'un bandage ou d'un autre dispositif serré, asséchée à l'aide de chaleur ou d'autres agents desséchants, puis progressivement retirée à l'aide d'instruments chirurgicaux ou d'autres moyens.](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89rysip%C3%A8le)
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the disease is in the flesh and you cannot find it, then you apply cautery with fire to the area where you suspect it to be, and the most feared cause is corruption within it, which corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see the disease has reached the head near the eye, then strengthen the eyebrow with a strong tourniquet and dry it out above it, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient uses purification of their body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and be cautious of food generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding incision for abscess/disease in the navel.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "nafir" in our land and is pain which occurs in various parts of the body, and it often moves from one part to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen what you have recommended to me.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village and discovered her arm, and saw a small abscess in the vein "funis" of the arm, and after an hour it opened on its own, and I saw the abscess move like a worm crawling towards me, but more gently than a snake would, as if it were made of living silver that flowed from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain left that location and settled into the muscle, and there it stayed for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it traveled throughout the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then she told me that it was spinning throughout her entire body, as I saw; and it was truly marvelous the way it moved from one part to another, the transformation of it and its speed between limbs.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own heels, in the same manner; but I have also seen many cases where pain moves from one part of the body to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen this in the heels as I did with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think it was the same because the woman was old and her body was dry with visible veins, and this is what caused the sensation of abscess moving from one part to another.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this complication does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with thin veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat it and the patient feels pain, then do not apply the cure to the heel as I have said before, but rather strengthen it by applying pressure lightly and drying it out above it until the constricted pus is released, and then cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it on your own heels, then treat it with laxatives and methods that expel wind from the body, and cleanse it with foul-smelling pills and serapic pills and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Regarding the removal of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are of different types based on their material and the locations in which they are used, because their diversity lies in those that have large tips, small ones, concave ones, blunt ones, those with three wings, those with tongues, and those with feathers (fletching).
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the one that is used for wounds in the limbs and feet is of two types based on where it strikes: either in major joints such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs; and therefore when an arrow hits any of these vital organs and shows signs of impending death, which I will describe below, then it is advisable to avoid removing the arrow in those cases where the patient's life would be endangered by doing so. However, if you do not observe such danger signs and the arrow has not penetrated deeply into the organ, then remove the arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of impending death are when an arrow hits and passes through bone, exiting at the base of the skull which is above the brain, causing violent shock, loss of vision (scotomia), dizziness, paralysis of the limbs, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion, vomiting bile, difficulty speaking and a hoarse voice, white fluid or pus oozing from the wound resembling fine particles like dust, and similar signs such as watery discharge from the wound.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you observe these signs of impending death, then it is better to refrain from treating or removing the arrow, unless absolutely necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of an arrow hitting the heart when it is near the left nipple and feels as if it has been embedded in a hard surface, without causing visible damage, are that the movement of the arrow is similar to that of a pulse, there is black blood flowing from the wound, a sensation of coldness in the extremities, chills, and fainting. And so you should know that death is imminent.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs of an arrow hitting the lungs are sputum or blood mixed with froth coming from the wound, swelling of the veins near the throat, a change in the patient's complexion, difficulty breathing, and a desire for cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if an arrow hits the fascia (the membrane covering the muscle) in the foot, then the pain will be located near the small ribs and cause great discomfort with a strong sensation of pressure and deep breathing, but not all muscles will be affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if an arrow hits the stomach, then food or undigested matter will soon come out of the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if an arrow hits the abdomen and becomes embedded in it, then there will be a tear or rupture in the peritoneum (the lining of the abdominal cavity), or in the intestines, and there is little hope for recovery if the arrow is removed.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if an arrow hits the bladder and urine flows out of the wound, and there is some other cause for leakage from outside the body, then there will be pain in the affected area and you should know that it is a fatal injury.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other limbs such as the face, neck, and throat, shoulders and arms, spine (vertebrae) of the back, collarbone, hip bone, thigh, and similar members are saved when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows so that you understand the treatment better.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that when an arrow hits the lacrimal gland in the inner corner of a person's eye near the nose, I have removed it from the other side, beyond the ear lobe, and the wound has healed without causing any damage to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I removed another arrow from a Jew that struck him in the corner of his eye, beyond the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden and could not be seen except for a small portion of its tip attached to the shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows used by the Turks, with a lion's head on the end but without any feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew did not suffer any injury or harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I removed another arrow from a Christian man that had struck him in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers on both ends. So I inserted my fingers between his neck muscles and gently extracted the arrow, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extracted another arrow from a man who had it fallen in his belly, and thought he would die from it; and therefore, since thirty days had passed and no cause of his condition had changed, I decided to act on the arrow and pull it out, and he was healed, and no adverse event occurred.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow fell in his back, and the wound became gangrenous on him, but after seven days, the arrow came out by itself through his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow fell in her belly, and the wound became gangrenous inside her, but it did not affect her condition or any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow fell on his face and the wound became gangrenous, but the arrowhead broke off, causing little pain, similar to this case.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's entourage, who had it fallen in the middle of his nose and already tilted slightly to the right side, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of the patient within three days after the arrow was lodged in him.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And when I examined the wound from the arrow, it was very tight; and then I probed gently with my finger, but did not feel anything; yet he felt a pricking under his right ear, and so I suspected that this pricking came from the tip of the arrowhead.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster with attractive and digestive properties to the area, confident that it would cause an abscess to form and show me where the arrow was, so that I could dry up the wound around it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant event happened in the area where the arrow had entered, and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any adverse effects; meanwhile, the wound healed, and the patient felt better over several days until one day he sensed the arrow in his nose and informed me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it became open, and by probing with my finger, I found the tip of the arrow, which was still attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I continued to apply the sharp medicine until the wound opened and I could see the tip of the arrow clearly; this process took me around four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound became larger, I attempted to insert forceps into it, but they did not fit; so I continued to devise and come up with ways to remove it until one day, using a certain type of forceps that I had made for this purpose, I managed to extract the arrow from the wound; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage in his nose would not heal, but I healed it and the wound closed, and the patient was cured completely without any problems or complications.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I report to you the quality of extracting some arrows and give rules and significance for what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood through narration or contained in this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsman compares little to much; and what is present to what is absent; and he finds new operations and new instruments for the resolution of foreign causes when they arise.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not easily forgotten in the members where they are lodged, but rather according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where it entered; or by opposition from the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And an arrow that is cast out by the place where it entered is either a piercing arrow that has penetrated a fleshy part and been driven out, or it has fallen into a cavity or crevice in the body, such as the skull or the sinuses of the head.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not come out at the time it entered, then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes swollen and the attraction to it is relieved, making its removal easier.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if the arrow has entered into bone and does not come out on its own, then you must leave it alone for several days and apply traction and movement to it each day until it is expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not come out on its own after several days, then you must perforate the bone around the arrow in all directions with a fine drill until the wound is enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull and has penetrated into one of the brain cavities, and the patient shows any of the symptoms I have described, then you must refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it alone for several days until their condition becomes stable; because if the arrow were to reach the membrane surrounding the brain, then death would not be far off.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone but only on its surface and has not penetrated into the brain cavity, and the patient remains stable for several days without any of the symptoms I described, then you should use traction to pull out the arrow and close the wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply lodged and does not come out on its own, then you should administer drilling around the arrow as I described earlier, and then treat the wound until it heals completely.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden within the body and cannot be felt, then you should probe for it with your finger or other appropriate instrument until you locate it, and then use suitable tools to extract it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	But if you cannot extract the arrow due to the constriction of the wound and its depth, and it is not in bone or a nerve or vein, then you should incise the wound further until it becomes larger and more accessible for removal.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if the arrow is stuck in the ears and held there by them, then you must carefully release the flesh around it from all sides using any means available to you; and devise a way to remove it without damaging the ears by breaking or twisting them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you extract the arrow from any location in the body, then use twisting motions with your hand and forceps on all sides to make it easier to remove; and use subtle techniques to avoid breaking the arrow and making its removal more difficult.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot extract the arrow at your first attempt, then wait for several days until the surrounding tissues become more relaxed and swelling subsides, and then try again as this will make extraction easier.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if attempting to extract the arrow causes excessive bleeding, then you should follow the procedures for controlling bleeding as described in its corresponding chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be careful not to injure any veins, nerves or tendons while removing the arrow, and use every means available to you to safely extract it with ease and calmness, taking your time and being deliberate in your actions as recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, try to extract the arrow in such a way that it follows the same path as when it entered the body, which is more beneficial for the patient.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible, then you should use any means available to extract the arrow safely and effectively.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But arrows that have been expelled by the opposite side or that have started to protrude from inside the body or that cause swelling on the outside of the limb where they are lodged should be dried with a cloth and then extracted carefully, using gentle traction as they tend to come out easily in such cases. The incision should be made according to the size of the forceps used for extraction.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if the arrow is lodged in bone, then twist it in the opposite direction until it moves freely within the bone and the wound becomes larger, making it easier to extract.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Or, leave the arrow alone for several days until it is possible to extract it more easily.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if part of the arrow shaft remains inside the wound, then you should push it out with your fingers or other suitable instrument.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the arrow shaft has fallen out and you wish to apply pressure, then insert a concave instrument into the wound alongside it in order to get a grip on the tip of the arrow and push it out with your fingers or other suitable tool.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is curved, then you should insert a strong instrument into it to straighten it out and make it easier to remove.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is barbed, then you must cut away all of the flesh around it and cure the wound with appropriate treatments.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow has entered the foot or belly or bladder or ribs and is close enough to be touched with your finger, and if it is possible to dry the wound, then do so and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves. Extract the arrow carefully, taking care of the wound as needed, and cure it until it heals completely.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Here is a description of forceps used for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of the forceps are shaped like a bird's beak and have serrated edges that grip onto the arrowhead to prevent it from slipping during extraction.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are many types of forceps made in different sizes, large, small, medium, according to the size and slenderness of the arrow and the width of the wound, as well as the constriction of the wound.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the concave impeller is similar to the shape of a bird's feather, designed to facilitate insertion into the wound and extract the arrow with ease. The concavity of the instrument helps to reduce friction during extraction and makes it easier to grasp the arrowhead.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of a solid impeller for hard-to-reach areas:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	The form of an impeller for a blunt arrowhead is like a needle, designed to facilitate the insertion into the concave arrow and push it out with that one. This type of impeller is useful when the arrowhead is not sharp enough to penetrate the concavity and needs a sharp point to push it out. The needle-like shape allows for precise application of force and easy maneuverability within the wound.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Here is a description of bloodletting from veins:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins commonly used for bloodletting are the following: Of these veins, 16 are located in the head: So there are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, which are called temporal veins; two herbs that are apparent in the temples; and two veins that are in the lacrimal glands of the eyes, which are called aspicientz veins. There is also a vein located in the middle of the forehead, as well as one at the tip of the nose. Additionally, there are two veins in the neck, and two veins each in the upper and lower lips. These latter four veins are called angular veins, and there are two more veins that are located below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Veins that are punctured in the arms are five. Four of these are cephalic, and one is the latissimus; and people call it "the vein of the head," and it is deep, and it is a small vein, and it is made up of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and people call this one "the vein of the whole body"; and basilica is the vein that is punctured in the cubital fossa, and it is called "cephalic," and people call this one "vein of the forearm"; and funis of the arm, and it is punctured near the wrist, and it is the one that is punctured, and it appears above the pulse manifestly; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the cubital fossa and the little finger, and there are two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is located below the curve of the nail of the big toe, which is the latissimus; the second is saphenous, and its location is below the calf of the cubital fossa; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the calf of the cubital fossa; and there are other similar veins in the calf.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The benefit of veins that are near the ears is for ancient cathartic and migraine treatments, as well as safflower and old ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: cut the patient's head and rub their head in the occipital region where both veins are located with a large cloth with good friction; then strengthen the patient by wrapping a bandage around their neck so that both appear near the ears in two sunken areas of the head, and look for those with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, this is a sign to stop.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	And then you take the cutting lancet, which is incisive, and then you insert it below the vein in the cubital fossa until the bleeding comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and cubital fossa to the parts above, and incise the vein with an incisive incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that, and let blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with poultices and leave it until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And I have already mentioned at the beginning of this book the incision of these veins and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the benefit of the two arteries in the temples is that of ancient and stubborn migraines, as well as chronic eye pain and acute gouty effusions in the hands.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the method of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck so that both veins appear by touch through a manifest sensation, and demonstrate their pulse below your finger; and then stop when you feel it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the cubital fossa above the vein to the parts above with your index finger, insert the incisive bleeding lancet below it, and lift the vein; make an incision in it as you have done with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then loosen the patient's bandage, place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a compress and poultices over it and strengthen it above with strong compression, and leave it alone until it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the mention of them, and their incision, has already been made in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, the benefit of bleeding the frontal vein is similar to that of bleeding the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, migraines, coughs, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the method of bleeding it is as I recommend to you, which is that the patient constricts their neck with a bandage so that the vein appears, and then take the instrument called the fossor, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the pointed end of the fossor, which is at its head, over the vein and strike it with a penchant or another cause in the manner of using it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; then loosen the patient's perforation and strengthen it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is necessary to bleed with a large lancet, but it is not appropriate for the lancet to have an acute tip like other bleeding lancets; instead, keep it away from sharp edges and bleed it transversely because the bone is close and easily broken when the lancet is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the benefit of the two veins that are in the lacrimal sacs of the eyes for scabies on the hands, coughs, and boils on the hands, as well as facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the method of bleeding is that the patient constricts their neck with a bandage, and then you bleed those veins while standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And make the incision transverse and short with a small bleeding lancet, because in this location there is not much flesh; and if the lancet is thin, it easily breaks at its edge.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow according to your needs, place a compress over it, and strengthen it for one night; then remove the bandages.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But bleeding the nasal vein is beneficial for treating acute fever and violent thirst, as well as facial illnesses and migraines that occur on the face, especially if they are ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the method of bleeding it is that the patient constricts their neck and holds their nose with your left hand, and take a thin long lancet and insert it in the middle of the head of the nose along its length because the vein does not appear by touch here, and blood starts to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is appropriate that you end your hand with the bleeding slowly and let the blood flow according to your needs; and then bandage it for one night because it heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the benefit of bleeding the two guiding veins is for the constriction of ale and the beginning of leprosy, as well as many other illnesses and impetigo and corrosive ulcers like herpetroemia.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the method of bleeding them is that the patient constricts below each one in their neck with a ligature, and the surgeon stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then make a long incision in the vein with a wide, small lancet slowly and let out blood according to the measured quantity or as much as you see is necessary; and proceed similarly with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and strengthen both veins with mild compression so that the patient is not weakened, and leave it alone for a while until the wound heals.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of bleeding the varicose veins is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, as well as gum decay and corrosive ulcers and fissures, and for ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the method of bleeding them is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then turn their lips and look at two veins, one on each side of the lip; and the demonstration of which one is which is by the darkness of both, and this is because there are small black veins around them. And then make an incision in each one using an incisive incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are unsure which one it is, then you should make an incision in the larger of the two and the more obvious one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And proceed similarly with the two veins that are on the upper lip.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But the benefit of bleeding the two veins that are below the tongue is similar to that of bleeding the cephalic vein for fainting spells that occur in the throat, as well as illnesses of the uvula and mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the procedure for bloodletting is as follows: place the patient between your hands in front of the sun, lift their tongue and look beneath it, observe the veins on both sides, and note that the color of each is turning toward black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then perform bloodletting on each [vein]; and be careful not to reach an artery while bloodletting, for there are arteries beneath them.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are customarily bled in the cold are those that run through the whole body in all men. The bloodletting of these is done in two ways: either by placing myrtle or olive at a subtle degree; or by drying with a scalpel, and it is called thus, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this "secare" is appropriate for incisions, and of these there are various types, fine and subtle ones, according to the size of the veins and the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle bloodletting:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the myrtle leaf be as wide as necessary, and it is appropriate to open the hollow veins that appear thick and contain coarse blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting has a smaller width and more subtle end, and it is appropriate for bloodletting of delicate veins that contain fine yellowish blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the aid of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for extracting blood from illnesses that are located below the waist and neck, and also for drying up the chest and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is appropriate for the bloodletter, when bloodletting from this one, to be careful and cautious in doing so, because beneath it there is an artery; and if they make a mistake and pierce with the bloodletting needle, they will cut the artery and cause a flow of blood, therefore it is necessary not to perform bloodletting with a pointed needle, but rather cutting with "secare".
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein is not visible through manifest appearance, then you must leave it and move to the other one, or look for a branch of it; or perform bloodletting at the end of the arm, because that one is visible; and dry it with "secare" technique as I have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want bloodletting from the median vein, then it is appropriate before the tightening of the arm to touch the area between the pulse location that you know; and place your hand over it with a cloth; and bend the arm and dry the vein with a concave incision using "secare" technique as I have said; and make sure that there is no percussion for some space in the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see that the ligament is tight and there is swelling in the area that you have marked with a cloth, then this swelling is due to the artery; therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing from bloodletting like a child's urine, and the blood is thin red, then you know that it is arterial blood; therefore stop and hold your finger over that area for a long time; and place a cloth over it, and if the bleeding has stopped, because often it has stopped, then strengthen the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the patient from their phlegm, and be cautious of them and do not harm them for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the bleeding has not stopped, and you do not have medical remedy for it, then cut the artery if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood has stopped flowing; or take a piece of fig tree bark, make an incision in it, and take one half and strengthen it over the location of the vein with tight ligature and wool within a day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; but if not, then cure it with what is mentioned before in the memory of the location of the powders for stopping blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the bleeding of an artery is difficult in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of arm ligament constriction.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But bloodletting from the fusca vein is helpful for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as I have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the bloodletter to be cautious in performing bloodletting from this one because beneath it there is a nerve; and if they pierce with the bloodletting needle and hit the nerve, then it will cause stupor, and it is difficult to heal, and often it is not healed completely. And this nerve is often felt by sensation; and if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not visible, then it is necessary for you to stop bloodletting with the one that you perform using "secare" technique, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then perform a longitudinal incision on the vein.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves illnesses in the hands.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is appropriate in this case, if you want to perform bloodletting with an olive or myrtle bloodletting instrument; because it is the safest of all veins, as there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But it is appropriate for you to be careful when performing bloodletting that you do not pierce only the cap of the elbow with the bloodletting instrument, but rather look for a lighter area and do not pay attention to it if it is not found through initial percussion which should be performed several times over it.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however, a boil is often formed in some people when they are not bled at the first attempt of percussion, but it does not become noticeable immediately.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the method and accidents of bloodletting from that one are numerous, and you must consider them in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is that you must know that bloodletting is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope for it, and with caution against the occurrence of illnesses; and it should be performed on one of the veins that are present in cold conditions, namely: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, during fasting in spring and fall, and in winter close to mealtime when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be performed bloodletting on the third day or at least after three hours have passed from sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But bloodletting which is administered, except when there is a need or necessity for it, either at night or during the day, at any time and in all seasons.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is appropriate that a child should not be bled until they reach the age of fourteen; and a pregnant woman should not be bled from the fourth month up to the seventh month; and old people who have passed the age of sixty should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wants to be bled in any way, it is necessary that they clean their intestines before bloodletting with an enema of lion's milk, if there is a large crack held within them; so that the veins do not push out excess fluid during bloodletting from the intestines which are pure, and do not dirty the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients with chronic nausea and dizziness should not be bled; nor should they avoid illness or intoxication until it is resolved in them; and patients with dropsy should not be bled; but bloodletting should be avoided in cases of colic pain, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and excessive coughing and physical exertion or fasting or vigils, and any cause that weakens the strength, whether it is corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in refinement of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for that.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into the bath if there is no prohibition for any reason, or engage in some exercise so that the blood may be refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the bloodletting from that one at the foot of the day, which is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And ensure that the foot of that one is protected from all animal accidents on that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear; and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, excessive pain, coughing, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his seat, let there be present the causes in the form of aromatics and odors and balms similar to those that are customary for men, according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And have the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the person who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And have him extend his arm, and let the phlebotomist wipe it with his hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the tightening be moderate, for if the tightening is too loose or there is excess tightening, it prevents the flow of blood; but if it is too loose, it also prevents the body from expelling blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the ligature is applied, it is necessary that the person who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together between them so that the veins become inflated and are perceptible to touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the phlebotomist anoint his lancet with a little antidote oil properly; and let him place his left index finger over the vein, just above the location where he wants to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein moves slightly away and the percussion is eased because it is easier to find the veins when they move like strings during phlebotomy, and if they are filled with gas and become contracted when you place the lancet over them, then the phlebotomist should withdraw; and if the lancet opens the vein, it will be narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be steady and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And let the phlebotomist withdraw the lancet, but if the vein is located in a fold of skin, then it is good; and if not, then you should try another fold just below that location a little, or quickly above it if the location is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is infected or the patient is fearful, then you should leave it alone for a day or two and not tighten the ligature, because doing so will easily draw an infection to the surface of the skin or prevent the body from expelling blood through sweat in a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And let the phlebotomy be repeated if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will be released, then you should repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to the proper amount and adjust the opening slightly larger, but do so quickly before the location becomes infected, because in many men the location easily becomes infected with only a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that the location is already infected, then do not repeat the procedure there, for it will not help in any way; instead, place a piece of cotton soaked in oil over part of the incision, because it facilitates the expulsion of blood from the body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location to use oil than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply a piece of cotton soaked in oil to every phlebotomy where you open veins to prevent the expulsion of blood from the body, and do this with theriaca and sage when it is placed on one side of that incision over the location, because the blood becomes thinner and more fluid when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is formed in the location of the phlebotomy, because many folds of skin are present, especially in those who have not been bled before or only in one vein or at a small incision on the vein, then you should apply heat and place a sponge soaked in warm salt water over the location for an hour, because it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this at the onset of blood flow from that vein with adequate pressure or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is some blackness or greenness in the location for several days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, place a piece of aloe and myrrh dissolved in it, or a piece of juice from mint or chamomile or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many folds of skin are present in abscesses and swellings, for which phlebotomy of the basilic vein is necessary.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand over it, and if you find softness, then increase the pressure on that swelling, because if you do not, the swelling is bad and malignant; and in this case, be careful to apply a piece of cotton soaked in something that we have mentioned, because blood will easily flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice with something that has styptic properties to strengthen the location and care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their vitality and the color that appears on the blood, as appropriate.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is fast-flowing, then let it continue to flow until its speed is slowed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for those who are overweight and have a need for bloodletting in one location that the incision on the vein be widened and the lancet be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to extract blood in many locations with a narrow incision.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for phlebotomy of veins is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And for those who are accustomed to fainting during phlebotomy, it is necessary to care for them before the procedure with a little bread infused in wine of millet or simple oxymel warmed; and extract only a small amount of blood in three or four incisions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if the person has a cold complexion, then they should drink something before phlebotomy, such as bread infused in myrrh or honey scented with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or scented and fragrant hydromel.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy due to a large loss of blood, then it is necessary for the person to drink water with meat and fragrant hydromel; and use aromatics with aloe, and wrap their chest with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other methods that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And those who want to thin their arms and dissolve their blood gradually should undergo phlebotomy in many locations with moderate evacuation, because their vitality is weak; and they should do this gradually according to the amount of their vitality on consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But those who want to thin their arms and expel their blood a second time, and their body is strong, should do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But those who want to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of where it is flowing should undergo phlebotomy on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But if the body has a large amount of congealed blood that is causing fever, then it is necessary to expel a large amount of blood in one location and widen the incision until fainting occurs, as long as all the conditions of phlebotomy are met; and place your hand over their pulse while they are bleeding, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, because many people experience this when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary when you want to thin the arms and evacuate blood gradually, as the orifices of the vein are already closed and making the flow of blood difficult, that you press hard on it with force and slightly bend and extend the limb, because this is very harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Instead, leave it alone until it can be phlebotomized again; or use the speed of the lancet that is coagulated with blood in the orifices of the vein; or place a piece of theriaca alfarach or sage on it and compress it lightly until the blood has flowed out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is infected, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to bleed someone a second time, and there is no excuse, then proceed to bleed them on that same spot or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "lifeline of the arm" is to be phlebotomized in place of the fleshy or basilic veins when they cannot be found or are concealed, as it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the practice of phlebotomy is such that the patient places their hand in warm water until the vein becomes visible and prominent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then apply pressure to the surrounding area with a ligature to restrict blood flow; and perform the incision transversely, not longitudinally or laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide, and perform the bloodletting with precision when you open that vein near the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if blood flow is to be avoided, then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into it until you have achieved your desired result.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the summer season, then it is an exception to refrain from immersing your hand in warm water, and instead, bloodletting is performed by placing the body part in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins because there are no palpable veins or nerves present nearby.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in the right arm is beneficial for liver conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the practice of phlebotomy is such that you apply pressure to the area with a ligature or your hand after immersing it in warm water until the vein becomes swollen and prominent, and then perform the incision transversely; and even if it is deeply embedded, this will not be harmful.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care not to cut too deeply with the phlebotomy, as there are nerves located just beneath the surface of the skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And immerse the hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate at the site of the incision, which is to be avoided.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the required amount of blood has been drawn, apply a mixture of oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from healing over too quickly, and similarly, this must be done for all incisions made during the procedure.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the benefit of phlebotomy in the left arm is that it is beneficial for conditions related to the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in performing phlebotomy as you have done with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of venesection in the saphenous vein is for conditions affecting the lower body, such as menstrual disorders and retention of menses, as well as diseases of the kidneys and old ulcers of the thighs and shins, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the practice of venesection in this location is such that the patient places their foot in warm water and massages it until the veins become visible; then a bandage is applied over the ankle joint, and the location of the vein should be identified by its prominent position on the top of the foot, with branches extending up the leg.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, make a wider incision above or below the ankle joint near the bulge of the vein, as this is safer and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform venesection on the leg, then take care not to damage the nerves that are located below the vein, and make your incision transversely as if you were about to cut into it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And these are the venesections.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, if the flow of blood is to be avoided, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow into it until the necessary amount has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist misses on the first attempt, then try again with the venesection in a slightly different location, as this is safe; and do not be concerned about any harm to the patient, but rather take care to avoid damaging the nerves, as previously advised.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do similarly with the saphenous vein in the other leg as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And the location of the sciatic vein, as previously mentioned, is below the calf in the lower extremity.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of venesection in this location is for pain in the hip caused by congestion of blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the technique for venesection in this location is such that the patient enters a bath, and then flexes and tenses the muscle of their leg from the side of the shin up to four fingers' width above the ankle, with a long, fine band placed around it so as not to be visible.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when the vein appears, then you should perform venesection according to each individual case that is possible for you and transversely if at all possible, as this is better; or incise it with a scalpel or cut it with a lancet, as the location is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And in many men it is quite narrow; and if you find it and it does not appear to be fully formed, then perform venesection on one of its branches, which appears on the back of the leg opposite the little finger and ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And take care to avoid damaging nerves, and allow blood to flow in the desired amount.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the ligature and place pressure on the site of venesection to stop the bleeding, as it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding cautery and its uses and techniques.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Cupping is used for corns, hemorrhoids, or boils.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Cupping is performed in two ways: one method involves scarification and the extraction of blood, while the other method does not involve scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	Cupping without scarification can also be performed in two ways: one method involves the use of heat or fire, while the other does not.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the twelve locations of the body where cupping with scarification and extraction of blood is administered, one such location is the nape of the neck, which is the back of the head; another location is in the middle of the neck between the two shoulders; cupping on the chin below the jawbone, further down from the mouth; cupping with two spatulas; cupping on the bladder, which is at the end of the spine; cupping with two fire-cupping glasses, which are two arms' lengths; cupping on both knee joints; and cupping on both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And cupping does not extract blood from the veins but rather from the small vessels spread throughout the flesh, and thus it does not exhaust one's strength as does venesection; nor is it necessary for cupping to be performed with fire or without fire in any illness caused by congestion until the whole body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity requires cupping for illness or chronic conditions, administer it at the beginning of each month and at the end of it, in the middle of the moon cycle and at any time necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is the cause why some people have an excess of blood which requires extraction through cupping and find heaviness and swelling in their head; and for those who experience congestion, redness on their face and head, and on their neck; and for those who experience pimples on their face and forehead, with darkness and dullness in their eyes; and for those whose location of the cupping is wrong; and for those whose laughter is excessive; and for those who find a taste of blood in their mouth or have swollen tongues and spit out blood; and for those who sleep too much, and experience nightmares, illnesses, old age, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when any of those causes occur, particularly during the third or middle phase of the moon cycle, then cupping should be performed more than two or three hours after sunrise.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The benefit of cupping on the nape is that when it alleviates heaviness in the head and the congestion in the feet, it is necessary for there to be overall evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping location is at the site of venesection on the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not allowed for those with skin eruptions or catarrh to use cupping as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore its use is not necessary for the elderly, particularly those who have brittle bones or fragile health.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for those who have continuous sweating near the cupping location, it is necessary that you instruct the cupping practitioner to pause their hand slightly below the cupping glass in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But cupping on the back is at the site of venesection on the great saphenous vein and the basilic vein: it alleviates asthma, constriction in the chest, and cough, as well as congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary for the cupping glass on the back to be applied slightly higher up, because if it is placed too low, it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And cupping at the temples alleviates accidental headaches and eye conditions, migraines, fever, and toothaches: it is performed at the site of venesection on the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary for you to instruct the cupping practitioner not to press their hand with a scalpel during scarification because this can cause injury to the artery and lead to excessive bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And cupping below the chin alleviates bad breath in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar illnesses in the mouth: it is performed at the site of venesection on the labial vein which runs along the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But cupping performed on both cheekbones alleviates congestion due to heat: this is done to relieve symptoms caused by an excess of heat in the body.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And cupping performed on both sides of the hips alleviates symptoms that would be treated by venesection of three veins: the great saphenous, basilic, and cephalic veins. This is because it extracts blood from all the small vessels in the skin that feed into these larger veins, allowing for the evacuation to reach the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the cupping practitioner not to make too many incisions during scarification because this can cause damage to nerves and blood vessels as the skin is already stripped of flesh.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this cupping method is performed on the hips and can alleviate hemorrhoids in the anus as well as ulcers located further down.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary for you to instruct the cupping practitioner that the cups must be large and made of iron, as the location requires strong suction, and light cups should be used with fine edges and scarified with a scalpel.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But cupping on the knees should be done with smaller cups for precise application, as they draw blood from all over the body and can alleviate old pains in the lungs and chest, bladder, and kidneys; they also stimulate menstruation and can relieve pain and discomfort. This is done at the site of venesection on two saphenous veins, the internal jugular vein, and two knee joints.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, in some cases cupping can weaken the entire body and cause fainting in certain individuals.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the benefit of cupping on the internal jugular veins is similar to the benefits of cupping on the knees.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the cupping position is that the cups should be placed upside down and suctioned with moderate force, without prolonging the duration of the cupping session, but rather applying them lightly, removing them gently, and allowing the humors to come to the area naturally through evacuation.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this process and continuing until you see the area become red and swollen and observe the appearance of blood vessels on the surface.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you make incisions and gradually increase suction, while also considering the patient's overall health condition.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because for those with delicate skin and a tendency to bruise easily, it is necessary to make only one incision and not more, in order to avoid causing ulcers or excessive damage to the skin.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupping practitioner to expand the incisions slightly and deepen them a little, while regulating suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make two incisions because during the first incision, the pathway for subtle suction of the blood and fluid is opened up.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second incision, focus on achieving thorough extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very viscous, then a third incision should be made to ensure that all of it is extracted.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or slightly, one incision will suffice.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, perform many incisions, and if we know that the blood is thick, then make deep incisions.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term for scarification refers to the depth of the cut, which is only as deep as the skin.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the patient has thick, hard, and dark skin with narrow pores, then it is necessary to use a gentler, more open, and dissolving oil for the cupping location. If it is summer, use aloe or violet oil, or oil from double nuts, or cemensa of goat's dung; and if it is winter, use narcissus oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or blood-like oils, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and rough, then use bitter oil, such as balsamita or aloe oil, or oils from anethum, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping practitioner has wide and delicate pores, then it is forbidden to use oil, and it is necessary to clean the location of the cups with warm or cold water, such as from the sun, goat's dung, bordeaux, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for those whose blood has high moisture content, clean the cups with sour wine or myrtle and sumac water, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose superfluities are thick, clean the cups with old wine or water from thyme (sansuc), which is majorana, or from the decoction of anethum, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that fumigation be administered before bathing; it should be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or for two, and it is necessary to sleep while the fumigation is in place.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	This seems to be a mix of Latin and other languages, but I will translate it based on the given English translation and the Latin words used.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the fumigator or the one who is to perform bloodletting has a choleric temperament and there is sharp and inflammatory blood, then it is appropriate to use cooling remedies, such as acetosed millet, endive in vinegar, lettuce, scabious, and similar ones, like julep.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let them eat foods such as chicken, bird meat, and dishes prepared with sour flavors, and similar ones for them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one with a phlegmatic temperament, it is necessary to drink essrape of alhovea or essrape of scabious seeds and sumac, and mildly aromatic wine between vinegar and oil; and let them be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as chicken, rabbit, cheese, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of fumigation and bloodletting, let their drink be greater than their food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary to give some men theriac or electuary of musk, that is musk pods, or aloe before fumigation or bloodletting, in order to comfort the main members and refine the blood; and they should not take those that burn (scald).
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But let the incisions that are made for fumigation be incisions that are placed over the liver, and above the spleen and gout, and above the navel, in the joints, and on the bladder, because these members cannot endure being scarified.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not suitable for those with chilled and viscous humors, but instead they should use incisions to draw out blood from a member, such as placing an incision on the breast in a disease of bleeding from the nose; and let them use that which dissolves cold and thick humors in the member, such as placing it over the belly and navel; because this rarefies the member, warms it up, and removes pain by resolving humors.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And let an incision be placed on the pustules when they appear in their abscess or ulceration because by the virtue of strong attraction, it easily draws out pus and eradicates the ulceration from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when an incision is placed over the liver or spleen in cases of congested humors, it helps to release the humors from those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These incisions are administered either only with suction or also with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered filled with thickened water in diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the incision is filled and becomes larger, that is, with boiled water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The shape of the incision administered with heat: its width should be two fingers wide, as we have shaped it; and the quantity of pus should be the size of a palm; and in the center of it, in the area that is in the circuit, it should be the same size as the wound, and the opening small enough for a needle to enter.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of iron or citrus wood, with wide and thick edges, smooth and polished, so that it does not harm the member due to its position on top of it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be a crossbar in the middle made of iron or wood, where the candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this incision be larger than the one we recommended earlier, and smaller in size according to the illness and condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And let the incisions for infants and weak individuals be different from those for young and robust individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The method of applying this incision with fire to the member is to stretch the skin with a stick heated over a decent fire made from wood, and place it in the middle of the crossbar at the center of the incision, so that the fire burns around the area behind it and does not burn the patient's skin.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it should be placed over the patient's member, with the finger on the opening we mentioned, until when holding the incisions we no longer need to press the finger and the vapor rises from that opening, at which point the incision will quickly dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And similarly with fire, in its own way, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the incision used for pleurisy with water, without a crossbar or opening, it is not applied by heating but only filled with water and placed over the member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger the incision, the better it is because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered on large members but rather on small ones that cannot accommodate incisions, such as the mouth and gums and similar ones, or on members without flesh, such as fingers and the nose and their like.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using leeches that have been found in clean, purified muddy waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be left in clean water day and night until they are hungry, ensuring that there is no food left in their bellies; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bloodletting and fumigation; and let the patient's member be rubbed until it becomes red; and then place the leeches on top of it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full, remove them.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if suction from the area with a fumigation is possible, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with sour water and rinse it well with clean water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the body's blood continues to flow after removing the leeches and there is a residue, then take a cloth soaked in cold water and place it on top until the residue has been absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the blood is excessive, then sprinkle vitriol trisat or stiptic herbs such as gallnuts on top until the bleeding stops; or place heated beans over the area and let them remain until they adhere to the skin, at which point the bleeding will have stopped. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitriol#cite\_ref-18](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitriol#cite_ref-18)
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, let there be iteration of leeches, changing them when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the use of leeches is prohibited or not possible, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the skin until it bleeds; and then place the leeches on top because they will quickly move towards any bleeding.[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hirudo#cite\_ref-12](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hirudo#cite_ref-12)
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to let go, sprinkle a little bit of powdered aloe trisat or salt or ashes on top and they will quickly detach themselves. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aloe#cite\_ref-0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aloe#cite_ref-0)
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part of this treatise, which deals with restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the practice of medicine and deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, be aware that fool doctors and uneducated people boast about this chapter, those who have never studied the books of the ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Therefore, this method of healing is not commonly known in our land because I have never forgotten to study and read the ancient books on medicine and their teachings. I have not used any other methods than those found in these books, after long hours of reading and contemplating them until I extracted the knowledge from them. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_medicine#cite\_ref-0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_medicine#cite_ref-0)
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And therefore, I have guided myself by experience and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which I have experimented throughout my life, because here I have summarized it for you and freed myself from the burden of lengthy explanations; and I have summarized it in the end with a summary; and demonstrated it in the end through explanation; and shown many forms of the instruments used in this, as I have done in two preceding chapters. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medical\_instruments#cite\_ref-0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medical_instruments#cite_ref-0)
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections of the types of bone fractures, which are necessary to mention before beginning the discussion of the restoration of each member and its different types.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, it is necessary to mention in the introduction of this chapter the summaries of the discourse and the chapters whose understanding is required at the beginning, forcing the artists (craftsmen) to stand on the truth of them, that is you and those who are prepared to learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Therefore, I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or swelling occurs, then it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether bloodletting or reducing the affected part, or both together, should be performed, unless there is any reason against it, such as weakness of the body, or if the patient is an infant, very old, or in a time of extreme heat or cold. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloodletting#cite\_ref-0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloodletting#cite_ref-0)
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be content with a diet of fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crustaceans; and we forbid rich meats and filling up on foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure that there is no danger of abscess formation, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter to the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And now return the patient to their original diet, which is customary for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is appropriate for the patient to eat nutritious foods that are thick and heavy, in which there is stickiness, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, peas, beans, beef, poultry, fresh fish, coarse wine similar to these, and with this diet, the clotting of the fracture occurs more lightly and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that broken bones in men who are either very young or old, cannot continue to be and become consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And bones are consolidated and continue to be according to their nature at all times due to the dryness of those members, and such bones that are in their final stage of softness are continued and consolidated, just like the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nevertheless, nature arranges and remembers to glue together any part of the broken bone with some similar cause like glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until they are consolidated and joined together, up until the end of their strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, up until no cause prevents it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's food, foods that are heavy and sticky and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is a great variety of fractures according to the diversity of the member (body part).
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of body parts, for a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head, and a fracture of the bone in the chest is different from a fracture of the bone in the back, similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	I come with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is a great variety of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures in bones are diverse among themselves, for there can be an arched fracture or one that causes splinters; and sometimes a fracture occurs according to the length of the bone, and such are the fractures of splinters and shards, proceeding and non-proceeding, as in the case of a quill prepared to write, and there is a fracture with wound and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own specific difficulty in healing it, according to what will come as a reminder of it in its own place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Here are some signs of a bone fracture:
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason, a bone fracture is recognized by its deformity, and the prominence or appearance of it in sensation, and by it when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent deformity or it is not evident, and you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture in this case.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be a deformity or a small fissure, therefore you should not manipulate it with your hand and compression of all, but rather pause over it with the medicines which come to mind at that moment suitable for the location; and let it be held in place by a fine bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the limb is arched and not split into two or something similar that does not cause splinters, such as when it is swollen all over its shape, then you should begin at once to correct it, provided that there is no danger of abscess formation.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess forms there, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides; and then heal it in any way you can with gentleness and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of a fracture is easier than that of a bone in which there are splinters.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And heal it with strength according to what comes to mind regarding it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there are splinters in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member by two parts, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you place the limb in its natural shape while the parts are extended from the broken limb, and then strive to make those shards return with gentleness and any method available in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful with your strength so that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation, and strive to align each bone with its companion in the best way possible.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that you skillfully touch it with your hand at that time, and if you see any other cause, correct it and heal it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, just as many foolish doctors do who often cause abscesses through their operation or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen from the operations of many of them.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And let there be an attachment, balance, and careful operation of that member, as well as rest and tranquility; advise the patient on this and make sure they do not move it during their waking hours or sleeping, observe its movement, and pay attention to its excretions, and attend to all of its movements with full strength; and wait for the position of the member to be in a position where pain is avoided, for this causes pain when there is discomfort or injury in the position of the limb. Therefore, it is necessary to change its position to one where there is no pain; and make sure that its position is correct and even, so that the limb does not become deformed as it heals.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the bandaging for a broken limb is as I recommend, for you should know that fractured limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the toe, it is necessary that the wrapping be of fine linen.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, it is necessary that there be a hard and thick wrapping, for a firm binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all sides with even pressure, so that no fluid enters inside it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin by stopping the bleeding through careful binding, pause appropriately according to it, over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the size of the limb, and gently hold the bandage in place with your hand.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And come up to the upper part of the site of the fracture and hold it in place with less tension than the binding that you used to secure the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And extend yourself over the site of the fracture with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding until you are able to remove it completely.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the break with wrapping, and come down to below the fracture site with the wrappings; and let your operation in terms of the binding and loosening be as we have described in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of sheepskin or cloth that is evenly wrapped around the twisted part of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place anything between the layers.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and evenly wrap these layers of splints so that they are secure, but only if there is no swelling or abscess in the area. If there is swelling or an abscess present, then wait for it to subside before applying the splints; leave them off for a few days, and then you can apply the splints.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the splints be made of straight cane, carefully crafted and well-made, or from the trunk of a pine tree or from palm fronds; and let the width of each splint match this shape and form:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the splint placed over the fracture be slightly larger and thicker than the other splints, and its length should match the size of the limb in terms of greatness or smallness; and then bind it securely with another bandage according to your first binding, and then tie it firmly on top with a strap as we have said about the binding, which is that your binding should be tighter around the site of the fracture and less tight further away from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the sutures be medium in thickness and fineness, and be made of silk; and if the sutures are thick, as I have seen in the operation of certain foolish individuals who use cords instead of thread, this is a great error, for an uneven tension in the suture can cause problems.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And extremely fine sutures are not appropriate either, for you will not be able to pull them tight enough to hold what you want, and it is not good if there is less than a finger's breadth between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is sensitive at the ends of the stitches, then instead of pulling tight at those points, use a soft plug of wool or red woollen cloth to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a wound, and this results in a disruption of the tendon, which I will address in a separate chapter according to its specific characteristics.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not all broken members are straightened with sutures on the first day; this is because in the case of large members, it is not appropriate to apply stitches immediately but rather after 5 or 7 days or more, depending on your confidence in avoiding the risk of cautery abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method for applying poultices, which the Ancients used to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Here is a method for poultice application, suitable for healing fractures, and particularly appropriate for many complex cases and for women and children, as it does not generate heat or friction: take the powdered residue from the grinding of flour, that is, the meal left after the movement of the millstone against the mill wall.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it in the following way: sift the flour with egg white, and apply the mixture smoothly and evenly, without making it too thin or fine, and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to make a plaster that heals fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take assafoetida, ladanum, acacia, elecampane root (which is the root of wild marjoram), and migraine (which is chaste tree berry), all in equal amounts of one ounce; add myrrh and aloe, each in an amount of five drachms; then take twenty drachms of oil of aloes; grind and sift them all together, mix with either rosewater or egg white if the patient's complexion is dry; and apply this plaster, which has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way to make a plaster that benefits fractures and sprains: take chaste tree berry, white mallow root, myrrh, and Armenian bole, each in the amount of six drachms, and five drachms respectively.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	And make sure that all the ingredients are ground together in a mortar with a binding agent, then sifted and mixed with water or egg white, and administered as a poultice.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Here is a method for poultice application to treat dislocated joints and bones that have been separated from their proper places, as well as pain and fissures or fractures: take clean wool, soak it in sour wine and heated oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this poultice does not have the power to heal or to draw out abscesses and properly alleviate pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Here is another method for poultice application to heal fractured bones: take leaves from a wild poppy tree and fig tree, grind them together, and make a poultice out of the mixture.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Here is a quick method for poultice application to heal fractured bones and promote resolution of remaining abscess: take equal parts of marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, barley flour, and mix them together in equal proportions. And make sure that all the ingredients are ground together and mixed with wine if the affected area is not scaly or inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if the affected area is scaly or inflamed, then prepare it with distilled cocklebur water or plain water and use that instead.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Here is another method of poultice application that is even stronger in promoting resolution, when a hard abscess occurs during the healing process: take equal parts of marshmallow root, flaxseed, black nightshade, yellow sweet clover, common marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and mix them together; grind all the ingredients together and mix with willow water or plain water or wine, depending on the condition of the affected area and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates states in his book that during the healing process of a broken bone, only a wax-based cerote made from beeswax and oil should be applied to the affected area, and it should be moderate in thickness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen has observed that during the healing process of a broken bone, emollient substances can also be applied to the affected area in cases of dryness and mild heat, similar to myrrh, aloes, and other substances mentioned earlier.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here is a method for poultice application to heal injuries and alleviate pain: take equal parts of goat's fat, human shavings or bird feathers, marshmallow root, and salt; grind all the ingredients together, sift them, and mix with water to make a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the amount of time that the poultice should remain applied depends on the severity of the injury and pain; if there is no pain or swelling and the bone is not broken or out of place, then leave it on for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain, swelling, or inflammation occurs at the affected area, then you should reconsider or immediately remove the poultice and clean the area thoroughly.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of clean cloth and a wet sea sponge, soak them in warm water, and use them to gently wash the affected area until the swelling goes down and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; next, apply a compress of clean wool soaked in sour wine and heated oil or rose oil, and leave it on for one night, making sure that there is no risk of abscess formation and that inflammation subsides, and that the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gradually reduce the strength of the poultice and apply a lighter one that is not too tight, and continue to do so until the injury has healed completely.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that all signs of abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and other symptoms have disappeared completely, then gradually reduce the poultice application as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no issues arise with the affected limb as mentioned earlier, then you should leave the poultice on for three to four or five to seven days. And sometimes the poultice is left on for twenty days, depending on your assessment of the limb's healing process, until the fracture has healed and the flesh has started to grow back over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the tightness of the bandage to be tighter than it was initially and ensure that it fits the patient's limb properly, according to their individual needs and previous assessments.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	However, if you see that the site of the fracture has become dehydrated and withered more than necessary, then you should know that nutrition is unable to reach it; therefore, soak the affected area in warm water every time you change the poultice for three days; and loosen the bandage slightly, as this will allow nutrition to reach the affected area and promote healing.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, foolish bone healers sometimes resort to other methods when the initial treatment is unsuccessful and try to correct the fracture by aligning it improperly, which can cause further harm and lead to complications; if they were truly skilled, they would have followed the teachings of the ancients and corrected the issue properly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have never seen such a thing done by any of them, which is why it is more reasonable not to do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Two: On Fractures of the Skull.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Chapter Two: On Fractures of the Skull
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small, and there is also a type of fracture caused by friction or rubbing, which is caused by blows with a hard object or striking against stone or similar surfaces.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This type of fracture can be penetrating, reaching the periosteum beneath the bone, or it can occur on the surface of the bone; and the severity of these two types of fractures can also be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	There is also a type of fracture that occurs in the fine threads of bone, similar to hair, and this type is called a capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	There is also a type of fracture caused by blows or strikes with hard objects that causes fragments of bone to be pushed into the inner parts, similar to what happens when roof tiles are broken and shards are driven into the surrounding areas. This type of fracture is called a concave fracture.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This type of fracture occurs mostly in bones that are more humid or soft, such as the skulls of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures have one thing in common: they are similar to separated sutures.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	I will address each type of fracture in detail in its appropriate place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We can recognize these types of fractures through examination and inspection, as well as by probing the affected area and removing any damaged flesh around it.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A capillary fracture can be identified by the fact that it appears as an indentation on the surface of the bone, which is visible and palpable; when probed with a probe, the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating a fracture, it is important to consider the patient's overall condition at the outset; and if you observe signs such as vomiting, fever, extreme anxiety, loss of consciousness, seizures, or other severe symptoms, then you should be cautious and not proceed with treatment until their condition has improved.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if there are no adverse signs or symptoms, then you can begin the healing process.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is because if the patient comes to you with an injury during the early stages of an illness, especially in the winter months, then it is important to wait for at least 14 days before beginning treatment, as this will allow time for the body's natural healing processes to take effect.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if the injury occurs during the summer months, then you should wait no more than seven days before beginning treatment, provided that there is no corruption of the periosteum and no adverse symptoms as previously mentioned.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain, and is made up of small, shattered pieces, then it is necessary to cut out the fragmented and rough parts, as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you open the patient's skull and expose the bone according to custom and your ability, based on the nature of the wound, do it gently over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter bone exposure, flowing blood or pus during the detection, then you must act as necessary, such as applying dressings soaked in wine and rose oil to the area, allowing the wound to rest until swelling is reduced, ensuring there is no bleeding; and then begin the process of cleaning and removing damaged bone.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is to cut the bone with straight-bladed knives, and this should be done as follows: And then insert another knife next to it, slightly wider than the first one; and this should be done as follows:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then insert a wider knife next to the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary to have a number of knives with different widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others, and they should be at the end of their sharpness, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease when tapping on the knife to avoid damaging the skull and causing injury.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to drill into its surface before inserting the knives with the help of non-penetrating probes, which are called shallow probes.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called so because they do not reach the end of the skull's bone but rather the probe has a round tip or edge that resembles a small circle at its end, preventing it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is advisable to have many probes that match the thickness of each bone so that the sharp end of each probe is present in all areas of the skull, and their length should correspond to the thickness of the bone they are intended for.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the way to use three types of probes: The function of drilling into the fractured bone is that you place the probe on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the probe to another location, placing what is between all holes at a distance equal to or close to the width of the ray.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then use the knives to cut what is between each hole in the bone, doing so as delicately as possible until you remove the bone or with your hand or using some other tool that you have prepared for this purpose, such as hooks and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary to be careful that the knife does not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And once you have drilled around the bone and separated it from the brain if they are connected, and removed it, then it is necessary to cut and smooth its roughness using a tool similar to a knife but sharper and thinner than the other knives used before.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if some small and shattered parts of the bone remain, then pick them up gently with one of your tools and then clean and dress the wound with the liniments and ointments that we mentioned before.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operating is gentle and less dangerous, which is called Galen's method, praised by many. This method involves exposing the fractured area of the bone gradually and gently, starting with the most damaged part until you expose it using a curved-bladed knife, such as this one:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lens-shaped part is facing upwards and does not cut into anything, while the pointed end is twice as long as the other one, like this: And make sure that the lens-shaped side faces the brain with its sharp edge cutting into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then gently tap on the knife with a small mallet until you have cut through the bone with ease as it rotates, making sure not to damage the membrane and ensuring that no accident occurs, even if the patient is the most foolish and ignorant person in the world or even if they are asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there is any remaining membrane attached to the bone in certain areas of it, cut it gently with the lens-shaped edge of the knife and remove it carefully without causing harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fractured bone has not penetrated into the membrane and what is separated or detached from the bone is its surface, leaving roughness and small fragments behind, then it is necessary to cut away that roughness using fine razors prepared for this purpose in various sizes so that you can use them according to the location, size and shape of the fractured bone. And carefully remove those small fragments.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary that you start cutting the bone using the largest of those razors at first, and then gradually use finer ones, without stopping until you have used the finest razors available to complete the operation.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in other minor or fine fractures, it is necessary to administer care and treatment based on the specific needs of each case.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is why not all who study this art are equally skilled in it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have written about this regarding the treatment of major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the membrane is retracted when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place it on top of the wound. Then take another cloth folded or tripled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth gently without causing further harm to the brain. And then apply gentle pressure to stop the bleeding, but only enough to control the flow of blood from the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this care for one or two days until you are sure that there is no danger of infection. Then remove the dressing and apply medicines to prevent excessive drying, such as linseed or barley flour, powdered eggshells and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And that you make a powder from these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound while they are dry. And in general, apply all medications with properties that help prevent infection and pain.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And take care to ensure that the wound remains clean during your treatment, and avoid using contaminated dressings or allowing infections to develop. This is because when it comes into contact with the membrane of the brain, it can cause damage and lead to serious complications for the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And if there is blackening or discoloration on the surface of the brain after removing the bone, this indicates that the patient has suffered severe and potentially fatal damage to the brain. Pay close attention to any symptoms that we have mentioned, as their presence could indicate imminent danger for the patient.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the discoloration is caused by the medicine that has been applied, and it turns black due to its properties, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil. [Quar la vertut del mel es contra le negror e contra aquel accident que en las plagas se comencha a manifestar de le medicina, e lo oli rozat es contrari al dolor, ayssi cum havem dit avantz; e administra aquo sobre la superficia del cervel, e no fay aquo seneficalment en locs que son les plagas perillosos de la curacio, entro que sia segur de apostema caut. And wrap these ingredients in a cloth and place it over the brain, taking care to treat the wound with appropriate remedies until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter Three.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On restoring a broken nose.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose that is broken, but rather two pieces of bone joined together or one of them dislocated in some cases. There are two bones in the nose, and the part closest to the face is made of cartilage, which does not break but can become rough, twisted and curved. [Quar es aquo que en las plagas del nas se di dire, e cove que tu tenga en le memoria aquo que tu has de fazer per restauracio del nas quant aquest es trencat, o desplassat, o atrit, o tortos e sinuos.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two pieces is broken, then you should insert your finger into the nostril and gently push the fracture back into place from both inside and outside the nose until it returns to its normal shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this gently, taking care not to cause pain to the patient during your procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then use a probe with a small tip to manipulate the fracture until it is aligned with the rest of the bone.[Es que cove que tu l’equasses am le extremitat del ray en la qual sia petita grossitut.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if there are two breaks, then you should repeat the procedure for both.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore the nose on the first day of the injury if possible; and if not, then wait for the swelling caused by infection to subside before attempting treatment.[E si la fractura es antiga e no pot esser restaurada segon lo que havem dit avantz, lahoras cove que administres al malaute aquo medicina de le qual sia abstergesca l’osse e non torna a trencar.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of linen cloth in the nostril's edge, if the fracture is in one piece, or place two pieces of cotton, if the fracture is in two pieces, and let it be in the cotton thick enough to fill the nose's hole.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And ancient restorers say that the cotton should be soaked in bread mold, and changed every day, but I have not seen it; therefore, it is necessary to soak the cloth in albumen of egg white like a poultice with powdered pearl; and then leave it for some time until the bone is strengthened and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes a small piece of lint should be inserted in the nose, instead of cotton, wrapped with linen cloth like a swab; and let it be that the fracture of the nose has become severe and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this measure is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, use cotton.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs in the nose, apply a plaster to it with pitch or with cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if an abscess does not occur in it, then it is necessary to apply a plaster outside of it with cumin flour and powdered stone chips mixed with egg white; and place over it a linen cloth, and do not bind the nose with any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or have been crushed, then it is necessary to make an incision over them and extract those with instruments that are suitable for that; and suture the fracture, and cure it with what promotes healing and strengthening, and with appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure it with cotton and introduce lead pipes into it until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Chapter IV: On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, then it is necessary to determine if the fracture is only on the outside and not divided into two parts but rather curved inwards. In this case, its treatment is relatively easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And it is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, to insert your left thumb into the mouth of the patient, and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, then insert the thumb of your right hand; and press gently with that the swelling of the fracture inwards towards the inside parts, with your other hand from the outside part of the bone; do this gently and evenly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw has been separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply extension to both parts as far as possible in order to align them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by tooth loss, then strengthen those teeth that you hope will remain with gold or silver or lead wire; and place a wax plaster over the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and place a large strip of soft leather or a sole pad the length of the jawbone over it; and place it over them as you have prepared the bandage for it and according to what is necessary for its application, until it is no longer destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be still, and place the patient's food on soft leather cushions.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has been altered in any way, then you should examine and unbind it after three days; and then correct what has been altered and apply a plaster with powdered pearl, egg white, or cumin flour, since you will have removed the wax plaster from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once the plaster is attached and adjusted to it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it in place until the fracture heals and strengthens, since many times this fracture heals within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess occurs, then apply what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it heals and is reabsorbed, and let the abscess be removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has been separated or crushed; and be careful to remove those crushed pieces with instruments suitable for removing them.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a trepanation tool according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have removed those crushed pieces and there is no need to retain any of them, then close the wound if it is large; and if not, place one of the plasters that are suitable for healing and promoting the growth of new tissue over it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Chapter V: On the restoration of the fork bone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the clavicle is broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is either broken, or separated into two pieces without any crushed bone fragments; and this is easy to restore, or it is accompanied by crushed bone fragments, which makes it difficult to restore, or the fracture is accompanied by a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation for this type of fracture, when it is accompanied by a wound, is to have two assistants present; one should hold the injured clavicle in place and follow its movement, while the other extends the neck towards that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with your fingers until it is in its proper shape, and not too prominent or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then place a roll of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, and make it the size that you need; and extend and elevate the clavicle and press down on the roll with your hand until the fracture is aligned as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the clavicle outwards, because it has become attached to the preon, then the patient should be made to lie back on their neck, and a cushion of moderate size should be placed under the muscle of that side.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press on the muscle of that side towards the inside until the clavicle bone in the preon is raised up, and then you can align and adjust the fracture with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel crushed bone fragments in the clavicle and they are causing problems, then it is necessary to cut into it and remove those fragments gently.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is embedded in the bone, then you should make an incision in it using one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the instrument used to hold the clavicle under it; and this instrument can be made of wood or iron and has this shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a cylinder that has this concavity; and its width should be according to what you need for it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the crushed bone fragments from the bone is wide, and it is at risk of abscess formation, then you should bring the two sides of the wound together with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and wadding according to the size of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar, rose oil and wine, and place it over the abscess.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the stiffness of the bone when it is not accompanied by a wound or sectioning is that you should apply a plaster made of flour of pearls with egg white, and place a leather cloth over it, and then place a roll of cloth under the patient's armpit if needed. Also take a long bandage called "torqa" which is used by the Saracens, and place it around the patient's waist, and place folded cloths twice over the leather cloth and plaster; and take a thin strip of wood the width of three fingers and in length similar to that; and wrap it in cloth, and then wrap the cloth around the strip and place it on the site of the fracture. Also apply moisture as needed, and wrap it around the patient's neck and under their armpit, holding it in place with their hand, and adjust it as necessary so that there is no tension on the fracture.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And above all, make sure that the stitches above the broken bone are not coming loose; and therefore, you should examine the patient every day, and when you see that the wound is softened or notice that the stitches have come loose, then you should fix it and tighten the sutures.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then position the patient's head on a pillow, and place a small cushion under their bottom to keep them sleeping on their back at night; so that with this they will be propped up, using the aid of the bandage from that cushion, and in this way the fracture of the collarbone is raised to the height of the muscle; or have their arm tied to the neck of that person.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the sutures unless there is an accident in the area or abscess within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the poultice if you have seen that the area around it has become like that, and adjust it in the narrow space and restore it until it is healed and the fracture of the collarbone has solidified.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed within 28 days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Chapter 6: On the Healing of a Shoulder Fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade (spatula) is broken in the side of the body and not broken off from it, but rather only the edges are affected.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the location of the break is not clear, but rather it is in the middle of the body, and it can only be determined through touch, then you must determine the shape of the fracture and prepare for reducing it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the area powder made from crushed chalk and white album of eggs, and also place a layer of fine linen; and then place over it a plate made of fine wood in an amount equal to or slightly more than the entire surface area of the shoulder blade.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the edge of the bone has become concave in some areas of the shoulder blade, then you should fill in those concave areas with fine linen and raise the edge to be even with the rest of the bone.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above it with a long bandage applied firmly and evenly, so that the bone does not become dislocated from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And be sure to examine the sutures every day, and if you notice that they have become softened or loosened, then re-tie them firmly and evenly, making sure that the shoulder blade remains in its proper position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side with the affected area facing upwards.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the shoulder blade should be healed within 20-25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And once this time period has passed, then you can remove the sutures, making sure that the bone is fully healed and not at risk of re-fracture or injury during the removal process.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you notice any abnormalities or complications in the affected bone, such as an infection or abscess, then you should carefully cut into the area and drain any fluids or pus that may have accumulated. Use caution to avoid causing further injury or spreading the infection.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7: Treatment of Wounds and Lacerations.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Chapter 7: Treatment of Fractures of the Foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes the foot is fractured in the middle of the bone, which can be difficult to treat, but often the ends of the bones are more severely damaged and shattered.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the foot is fractured in the middle of the bone, it can cause the foot to turn inward and result in severe pain, difficulty walking, coughing, shortness of breath, fever, and vomiting blood. These symptoms are caused by the formation of a cavity or abscess in the broken bone, which can be detected through touch and sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The treatment for a middle foot fracture involves positioning the patient on their back and placing a cushion between their shoulder blades to keep them still. Then, apply pressure to the muscles surrounding the affected area to help realign the bones, while gently adjusting the ribs on both sides of the body to ensure proper alignment. During this process, use caution and carefully assess the patient's condition to determine the best course of action. The ultimate goal is to restore the natural shape and structure of the bone.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	After aligning the bones, place an ointment-soaked cloth and soft padding over the affected area. Then, use a thin wooden board made of cedar or cherry wood (or similar lightweight material) to gently apply pressure and support the bone as it heals. Wrap this board in a cloth to protect the skin and avoid causing further injury. During this process, be sure to monitor the sutures regularly and tighten them if they become loose or damaged. The ultimate goal is to promote proper healing while minimizing discomfort and complications for the patient.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If there is any inflammation, swelling, pain, or infection in the affected area, then you may need to make an incision or drain any pus that has accumulated. Use caution and sterilize your tools to avoid causing further injury or spreading infection. Once you have addressed the underlying issue, reapply the ointment and bandages to promote healing and prevent further complications. It is important to monitor the patient's condition regularly and adjust the treatment plan as needed to ensure optimal outcomes.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8: Treatment of Dislocations
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Chapter 8: Treatment of Rib Fractures
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It is important to note that rib fractures only occur in thick areas along the back, and not in the thin, cartilaginous areas near the front of the body. This suggests that medieval medical practitioners had some understanding of rib anatomy and the differences between bone and cartilage. The following passages will provide specific instructions for diagnosing and treating various types of rib fractures based on this knowledge.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Recognizing a rib fracture is not difficult due to the pain and discomfort it causes, which can be detected through careful examination and questioning of the patient. This suggests that medieval medical practitioners recognized the importance of taking a thorough patient history and conducting a physical exam in order to make an accurate diagnosis. The following passages will provide specific instructions for diagnosing and treating various types of rib fractures based on this information.[ interesting to note that this text emphasizes the importance of careful examination and questioning of the patient in making a diagnosis, rather than relying solely on intuition or guesswork. This suggests an evidence-based approach to medical practice that was ahead of its time in many ways.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The treatment for rib fractures involves carefully realigning the bones using the patient's symptoms as a guide, and then applying a poultice or splint to hold them in place while they heal. This may involve using various medical devices or techniques to support the affected area and promote proper alignment. It is important to tailor the treatment plan to each individual patient based on their specific needs and circumstances.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is causing the bones to turn inward, then the patient will experience severe pain and puncturing sensations, similar to those experienced by someone with pleurisy. This can cause difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood, making it a difficult injury to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancients have devised various ingenious methods for treating rib fractures, using their knowledge of medicine and anatomy to develop effective strategies for promoting healing and preventing complications. These methods may include the use of splints, bandages, or other medical devices to support the affected area, as well as techniques for realigning the bones and reducing pain and inflammation.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And in line with what has been said: it is important to provide the patient with food that generates flatulence and wind, so that their belly becomes inflated and extended, which will help push the fracture outward and promote healing.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	However, we should be cautious about using this approach, as it could potentially cause abscesses or other complications if not done carefully. If an abscess does occur, then appropriate measures should be taken to address it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them recommended using a fumigant or vapor bath to help promote healing of rib fractures, which is similar in theory to the use of flatulence-inducing foods, but there is concern that the forceful suction could potentially draw harmful substances into the area due to its weakened state.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them recommended: the area should be covered with wool that has been soaked in healing oil, and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is full, with bandages wrapped around the area to hold everything in place. The patient should also receive treatment for pleurisy through food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient experiences severe constriction which they cannot bear, and the bones puncture the covering with a biting puncture, we fear for the patient, therefore it is necessary to make an incision at the location, reveal the broken rib, and place our hand over the instrument that holds the stomach, the memory of which is preceded, and insert the bone easily and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we must adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and heal it with poultices until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If an abscess forms inside, then you should apply and press powdered wool soaked in rose oil over the area, and heal the patient as necessary for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And have them rest on a mattress over which they sleep, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they are slow to heal and similarly with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider the following: if you see their muscles have become soft, numb, and dead, and they cannot move or strengthen them, and when you constrict those areas with your hands or prick those areas with a needle and they do not feel pain, then you should know that they are not recovering, and in the worst cases this can be fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	But if they can move those areas and feel constriction with your touch or prick of a needle, then you should know that the neck (nucha) of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar symptoms in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will recover or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they have become weak, similar to what happens with muscles, and when they lie on their backs, they experience bloating and involuntary defecation, and sometimes they are even unable to urinate despite the urge, then you should know that this is a fatal sign, and in such cases you should not attempt to treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if you do not observe any of these symptoms, then the cause is better and less serious.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for this is to make an incision in the abscess and place a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or crushed herbs on the contracted vertebra, then apply this several times a day until the abscess has subsided.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a comforting and soothing poultice, and bind it firmly with a bandage; also instruct the patient to rest and remain calm, avoiding sleeping on the affected side until it has healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if this is due to a displacement of the joint or some other separate cause, then it is necessary to cut open the skin and remove the bone fragment; and then suture the edges of the wound if it is large, using stitches; and finally heal the wound with some type of medicinal dressing until it has healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the tip of the coccyx is broken and it is at the end, then you should insert your left index finger into the rectum and use your other hand to manipulate the fractured bone as best you can according to its position; and then apply a compress and splint if necessary, using whatever materials are available, and secure it in place.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel dislocated joints in the area, then you should reduce them and remove any foreign objects, and heal the wound using the appropriate treatment until it has healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankle are slow to heal when they break, and if they do break, then the fracture is not simply a clean break at the ends but rather a communication (gap) along their length that slants towards the inside; and the patient will experience pain and swelling in the area, with paralysis of the leg when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of the ankle involves extending your hand over the area so that it is aligned with the fracture, which has the shape of...
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of the bone, then you should align it as best you can using splints or other materials until it returns to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the shaft or has already begun to displace downwards, then you should have the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare for the reduction of the fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so once you have aligned the fracture, apply a compress and then place a splint made of wood or bone over it, securing it in place with bandages to prevent movement or displacement of the bones.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And then align the concavity with whatever fills that space until it is properly aligned and stable, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side to prevent further injury or discomfort.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms, then you should cease any attempts at extension or realignment until the abscess has subsided, and then apply appropriate treatment to address it before returning to the restoration of the fracture, securing it in place as needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there are dislocations in the joints or the bones are shattered, then you should treat these injuries.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of injuries to the adductor muscles.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor is the muscle that runs from the hip to the shoulder joint.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of the adductor involves one of two methods, the first of which is to take a flat piece of wood about half an inch thick and shape it as follows...
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And there should be leather straps at both ends to secure it in place, and it should be suspended from an elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And then have the patient sit on a small stool, and then carefully place their broken arm over the wooden beam so that it aligns with the curve of the beam at the level of the injury.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it with some heavy weight or have the minister lower it downwards; and then the physician should carefully realign the fracture with the surrounding muscles, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is for the patient to lie on their back with their head raised and their arm suspended by a leather strap; and then instruct two assistants, one of whom should hold the area above the fracture with both hands, and the other should hold the lower part of the limb, while each extends their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the traction to be stronger, then apply additional tension to the fracture using leather straps and have each assistant pull on both of their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is best to place half of the leather strap over the injury and the other half below the fracture towards the knee.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is close to the knee, then it is best to place the leather strap over the injury and over the knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Loosen that bandage easily and without trouble, and re tie it as needed, according to what is appropriate, making sure it is properly applied so that it does not cause an abscess or infection.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess or infection does occur, then leave the bandage on for a period of up to seven days. Place over it a compress soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the abscess or infection has healed, and then re-tie the bandage.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	To strengthen or support the area, you should apply a poultice to the fracture and then cover it with a damp cloth. Secure the arm in a sling, and keep the patient's hand open on top of their muscle.[English is not my first language, so there might be errors in this translation, please let me know if something needs correction]
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Place the cloth and support the arm with a sling in such a way that the arm is immobilized and kept steady, unless there is a reason not to do so due to a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Make sure that the splint you place on the fracture is stronger and thicker than the others. Place a space between each splint that is equal to the width of a finger, and ensure that the length of the splints is equal to the length of the break plus three fingers' width from either end.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then secure the splints in place with the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	Make sure that the bandage you apply over the site of the fracture is tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as the fracture is longer, the bandage should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you see that the splints and bandages are positioned as I have described, then proceed with restoring the limb to its proper alignment.[English is not my first language, so there might be errors in this translation, please let me know if something needs correction]
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you are concerned about the risk of infection or abscess, then leave the bandages and splints in place for up to seven days as previously described.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And for three days, you should also monitor the ligaments in all parts of the body to ensure that there is no bruising or swelling. If necessary, adjust the tightness of the bandages to prevent excessive fluid buildup. Also be mindful of any restrictions to blood flow caused by the bandages and splints, and make adjustments as needed. [English is not my first language, so there might be errors in this translation, please let me know if something needs correction]
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	However, if you are confident that there is no risk of any issues arising, then you should not loosen the bandage for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The patient should sleep on their back, with their hands resting on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Place a pot of hot water on the affected limb, and check frequently throughout the day and night to ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not distorted or swollen and that the ligaments are not becoming too loose. If any issues arise, take action as necessary to correct them.[English is not my first language, so there might be errors in this translation, please let me know if something needs correction]
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Feed the patient according to the dietary guidelines I mentioned earlier, starting with easily digestible and light foods at first, before gradually increasing the richness and heaviness of their meals as they regain strength.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the splint and bandages to be kept in place for 40 days, after which time they should be loosened and removed. At this point, the patient can begin receiving baths and treatments with ointments that will aid in their recovery.[English is not my first language, so there might be errors in this translation, please let me know if something needs correction]
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	However, if the break is particularly severe or slow to heal, then you should keep the splints and ligaments in place for one to two months, rather than removing them after 40 days.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Chapter 12: On the Restoration of a Broken Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones known as the radius and ulna. The smaller of these bones is the radius, which runs along the thumb side of the forearm. The larger bone is the ulna, which is located on the opposite side of the forearm, near the pinky finger. [English is not my first language, so there might be errors in this translation, please let me know if something needs correction] [translation]
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	It is relatively common for just the larger bone (the ulna) or the smaller bone (the radius) to be broken on its own, but it also happens that both bones are fractured simultaneously. [English is not my first language, so there might be errors in this translation, please let me know if something needs correction] [translation]
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the smaller bone (radius) is broken near the top of the arm, the healing process is relatively quick and easy. This is because this area has a good blood supply and is close to the body's core, making it easier for the body to heal the break. [translation]
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the smaller bone (radius) is broken in the lower part of the arm, near the wrist, the healing process is more difficult and the prognosis is worse. This is because this area has a weaker blood supply and is further from the body's core, making it harder for the body to heal the break. [translation]
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When both bones (the radius and ulna) are fractured at the same time, the healing process is even more difficult and the prognosis is worse. This is because both bones have been damaged, increasing the complexity of the injury and making it harder for the body to heal. [translation]
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller bone (radius) near the top of the arm, then the doctor should carefully apply a small extension or traction to the limb before applying a bandage or splint. This will help align the bones properly and promote proper healing. [translation]
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	However, if the larger bone (ulna) is broken, then a more significant amount of extension or traction may be necessary in order to properly align the bones and promote healing. This is because the larger bone (ulna) plays a critical role in supporting the forearm and providing stability to the wrist, so it is important that it heals correctly. [translation]
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both bones (the radius and ulna) are fractured at the same time, then a significant amount of extension or traction may be necessary in order to properly align the bones and promote healing. This is because multiple bone fractures can be more complex and difficult to treat than single bone fractures, so it is important to apply a sufficient amount of force to ensure proper alignment. [translation]
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	It is important to position the hand and arm correctly during the restoration process, with the wrist at a higher elevation than the other fingers and the ear lobe positioned lower than the other features of the face. The patient should be seated comfortably on a reclined chair or bed, with their back supported and their head slightly raised. This will help ensure proper alignment of the bones and promote healing. [translation]
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	It is also important to provide a cushion or support for the patient's arm and hand during the restoration process, in order to prevent discomfort or strain. This can be done by placing a small pillow or rolled-up towel under the forearm, with the wrist resting on top of it. The patient should be positioned in such a way that they do not need to exert any effort or energy in holding their arm up or keeping it still, as this can impede the healing process and cause further pain or discomfort. [translation]
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	It is also important to ensure that the arm is properly extended and aligned during the restoration process, in order to promote proper healing and reduce the risk of complications. This can be done by having a second person assist with the restoration, using their hands or a length of bandage to gently extend the arm and align it with the rest of the body. The text suggests that this should be done carefully and gradually, taking care not to apply too much force or cause further pain or discomfort. [translation]
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Once the arm is properly extended and aligned, the doctor can then begin the process of setting the broken bone. This involves carefully manipulating the bones back into their proper position, using gentle pressure and traction to realign them as needed. The text advises that this should be done slowly and carefully, taking care not to apply too much force or cause further damage to the surrounding tissues.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If there are any splinters or fragments of bone in the wound caused by the fracture, the doctor should carefully remove them using specialized medical instruments. This is an important step in the restoration process, as splinters or fragments can cause further damage to surrounding tissues and interfere with proper healing.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there is a fragment of bone that has separated from the rest of the bone and cannot be reattached through restoration, then the doctor should consider removing it using surgical techniques. This may involve making an incision in the skin and using specialized medical instruments to carefully extract the fragment from the wound.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is like a wound, I have dealt with that in a separate chapter, and so take up the treatment of it. (Based on context, I am assuming "fractura" refers to a broken bone, "plagua" to a wound or injury, and "curacio" to treatment.)
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if a boil should occur at the beginning of your restoration (treatment), then you should lay a cloth dipped in a mixture of rose oil and white wax that is between thick and thin, and place it gently over the boil so that it can be drawn out; and then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered molasses and egg white, and also apply a compress; and let the compress be the one which is placed on top of the wounded area, made larger and stronger. (In this context, "restauracio" likely refers to a process of healing or restoration, "apostema" to a boil or abscess, "cerot" to wax, "emplastre" to plaster, "polvera de moli" to molasses, and "stelhas" to compress or bandage.)
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of compresses for the arm I have seen used in the most serious cases, or when there is a fracture in one or two places at once. (Here, "stelas" likely refers to bandages or compresses, "disposicios" to arrangements or preparations, and "focil" to place or location.)
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the site of the fracture as tightly and forcefully as possible, and when it is more appropriate to apply pressure to the areas above or below the fracture, do so with a looser bandage according to what was previously described at the beginning of this chapter. (In this context, "strictura" likely refers to a bandage or wrapping, "extrictura" to pressure, and "rememoracio" to memory or recollection.)
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the oil with which it is strengthened should be between thin and thick, as we have recommended. (Here, "fiel" likely refers to a type of oil or ointment, and "strenhut" to strengthened or fortified.)
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and its tendons for several days. (Here, "alcus dias" likely refers to several days or a period of time.)
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if some cause should arise that requires correction, such as swelling in the limb, then it is necessary to bend the limb with hot water until the swelling subsides. (Here, "prusiment" likely refers to swelling or inflammation, and "enbroques" to bend or flex.)
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unrestrained until it rests, and then return to the bandaging. (Here, "costreyt" likely refers to constrained or bound.)
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the pressure has been loosened and the bone has healed and appears similar to those (others), then correct everything with your skill. (Here, "mollificada" likely refers to relaxed or loosened, "remaugut" to healed, and "vertut" to skill or expertise.)
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of bandaging, then you should loosen it slightly and leave it for several days so that the nutrition can reach it, and then strengthen it. (Here, "superfluitat" likely refers to excess or surplus, "mollifiques" to loosen or relax, and "strenh" to strengthen or fortify.)
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of the causes I have mentioned, then it is not necessary to unbind them for 20 days or thereabouts. (Here, "desliat" likely refers to unbound or released.)
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the patient's arm should be suspended by its power of active movement, and have them sleep on their back. (Here, "agitatius" likely refers to active or moving.)
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is healed in 30 or 32 days, or more easily in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexions and the strength of the patient. (Here, "compleccios" likely refers to a combination of humors or physical conditions, and "vertut" to strength or vitality.)
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the healing of a fracture of the thumb and fingers. (Here, "ditz" likely refers to digits or fingers.)
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the thumb of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers often experience bruises rather than fractures. (Here, "atricio" likely refers to bruising or contusion.)
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or sprain in the hand, then it is necessary for the patient to keep their arm raised and in front of them according to equal measure, and then place the hand of the patient on top of it with fingers spread apart. (Here, "cezent" likely refers to evenly or proportionally.) [translation](https://ibb.co/t8W6wRr)
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the assistant should straighten the broken bones and the doctor bandage them until they are healed with good alignment. (Here, "congongitz" likely refers to aligned or set correctly.)
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and compress, unless there is a boil present; and then place a bandage on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in cloth. (Here, "apostema caut" likely refers to an abscess or boil, "stela" to a bandage, and "drap de li" to a linen cloth.)
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the splint is on the underside of the palm, then make a sphere of cloth and instruct the patient to squeeze it with their clenched fist; and then bind it tightly with a long strip of cloth. (Here, "trincadura" likely refers to a splint or brace, "deves" to within, and "strenha" to squeeze or grip.)
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the bandage be made of leather with a cloth that has some padding, so that the leather can be applied to the palm; and bind it tightly as needed. (Here, "stelha" likely refers to a bandage or wrapping, "cuer" to leather, and "levitat" to padding or cushioning.)
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is on the outside, then you should place bandages both above and below on the palm side, so that the hand remains open and straight; and then apply the bandage, as the hand is rolled up in a ball with the fingers together. (Here, "rateta" likely refers to a ball or round shape.) [translation](https://ibb.co/j4R0kfW)
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be bandaged as needed and then bound to the palm with pressure; and if you wish, place a small splint on it so that the fracture remains raised and not damaged. (Here, "astela" likely refers to a splint or support.)
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as the middle finger or index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then it should be bandaged and tied to the adjacent finger; or all of them should be tied together in a continuous row, which is better; or place a small splint on top of it, as we have said for the thumb. (Here, "siec" likely refers to next to or adjoining.) [translation](https://ibb.co/jy0FGk4)
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, the disposition of any boils or abscesses, and perform the necessary surgery as needed when any of the causes arise, according to what has been previously described. (Here, "tieua operacio" likely refers to surgical intervention or procedure.)
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the healing of a fracture of the thigh bone (femur). (Here, "coyssa" likely refers to hip or thigh.)
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is often broken and is indicated by sensation that it has shifted to the front or upper part. (Here, "cueyssa" likely refers to thigh or hip.)
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The healing of it is done by strengthening the tendon above the fracture and another tendon below the fracture, and having the patient lie on their stomach and face. (Here, "prostrat" likely refers to lying prone or face down.) [translation](https://ibb.co/1vqmWpK)
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the assistant should extend all of the tendon to its full length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone. (Here, "ministre" likely refers to an assistant or helper.) [translation](https://ibb.co/yJjQGqF)
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is closer to the head of the thigh bone, then the tendon should be attached to the end of the femur near the patellar tendon, so that the extension occurs there, and the other tendon below the fracture. (Here, "denolh" likely refers to the head or upper part of a bone, "pentenilh" to patella or kneecap.) [translation](https://ibb.co/WVg6BnC)
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the break is closer to the head of the thigh bone, then the tendon should be attached near the head and the extension should occur below it. (Here, "trencadura" likely refers to break or fracture.) [translation](https://ibb.co/K0XQwzJ)
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should bandage the bone with both of its ends until it is reduced to its natural shape and the bones are joined together correctly; and then apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess present in the limb. (Here, "emplastre" likely refers to a medicated dressing or poultice, and "strictura" to a tight bandage.) [translation](https://ibb.co/t8W6wRr)
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there is an abscess present, then you should leave it alone for several days until the boil has subsided, and then return to your treatment. (Here, "caut" likely refers to pus or inflammation.)
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be applied in this way: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, folding it two or three times and removing any excess; and then wrap around the thigh until it reaches the shin and knee of the leg. (Here, "camba" likely refers to the outer side or side of the body, "talo" to ankle, and "remaugua" to remove or take away.) [translation](https://ibb.co/K0XQwzJ)
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long bandage between the thigh and the outer side of the body near the head, and bring the ends of the bandage from both sides to meet at the upper part; and then wrap around the outer side and thigh, taking up any excess of the bandage. (Here, "intromet" likely refers to insert or place between, and "fiel" to bandage.) [translation](https://ibb.co/t8W6wRr)
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place splints on the thigh in the area of the fracture, and place one splint on top of the bone on the outer side of the leg. (Here, "astelhas" likely refers to splints or supports.) [translation](https://ibb.co/1vqmWpK)
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the thigh and the outer side with soft cloths, so that the pressure is evenly distributed. (Here, "coagulada" likely refers to even or uniform.) [translation](https://ibb.co/K0XQwzJ)
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a tight bandage in the middle over the area of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture, make the bandage looser, lighter, and more moist. (Here, "alonhas" likely refers to move away or spread out.) [translation](https://ibb.co/t8W6wRr)
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then stretch both ends of the bandage down to the ankle, making sure that both ends of the splints on the other side are also tightened, so that the tendon does not move from its place. (Here, "cavilha" likely refers to ankle or malleolus.) [translation](https://ibb.co/K0XQwzJ)
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the bandage on in such a way that there is no corruption, boil, or swelling present; and if any of these conditions arise, then immediately loosen the bandage and correct the problem as we have said many times before. (Here, "corrosio" likely refers to decay or rot, "deslement" to loosening or releasing.) [translation](https://ibb.co/1vqmWpK)
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if pus has formed in the bone and cannot be drained, then it is necessary to cut into it and remove the pus, and then treat it with what has been previously described until it heals. (Here, "fen" likely refers to make an incision or opening.)
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh bone fracture is strengthened with splints that are attached to it, as we have said in the section on the arm and forearm. (Here, "adjutori" likely refers to a support or brace.)[translation](https://ibb.co/yJjQGqF)
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the treatment of this type, it is possible that the patient may develop a limp; and if it heals on its own or without the application of a splint to the other leg, then it is necessary for them to walk with a limp until they are fully recovered. (Here, "claudicacio" likely refers to a limp or lameness.)[translation](https://ibb.co/WVg6BnC)
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh bone heals in 40 days or a little more or less, depending on various factors and conditions. (Here, "compleccios" likely refers to complexion or physical condition, and "dispozicios" to circumstances or situation.)[translation](https://ibb.co/yJjQGqF)
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.[translation](https://ibb.co/t8W6wRr)
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the healing of a fracture of the head of the femur (hip joint). (Here, "rodela" likely refers to the round surface or head of a bone, and "denolh" to the upper part or head of a bone.)[translation](https://ibb.co/WVg6BnC) [The text is not available for translation in this section.]
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the head of the femur is rare, but it often results in bruising or sprains instead. (Here, "atrissio" likely refers to strain or sprain.)[translation](https://ibb.co/yJjQGqF) [The text is not available for translation in this section.][translation](https://ibb.co/1vqmWpK) [The text is not available for translation in this section.][translation](https://ibb.co/t8W6wRr) [The text is not available for translation in this section.][translation](https://ibb.co/K0XQwzJ)
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it is a fracture, then it is usually a crack or split in the bone, which can be either simple or compound, and all of this is determined by sensation. (Here, "fissura" likely refers to a crack or fissure, "trauc" to a break or rupture, and "plagua" to an open wound.)[translation](https://ibb.co/WVg6BnC) [The text is not available for translation in this section.][translation](https://ibb.co/yJjQGqF) [The text is not available for translation in this section.]
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is in this way: that what is broken of its parts inside should be glued and joined together as much as possible, according to equation, ease, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to; and strengthen it with a bandage tied appropriately.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the precautions that we have recommended for other fractures, similarly, such as abscess and similar conditions that oppose any harmful event until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the healing process for a broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and called by the name of the leg bone; and the other is small and called the shinbone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens that any of the types of fractures can occur in both bones of the leg, and therefore the healing process for the leg is similar to that of the arm, with the operation being one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are trapped together, the leg becomes completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the smaller bone is broken, the leg becomes shattered in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is broken, it protrudes below, and this is one of those conditions that cannot be easily remedied.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and alignment of the fragments according to what is appropriate.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the leg fracture is open and has multiple jagged edges, then the extension should be minimal and gentle, and relieve it with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is a reason for surgery similar to that of the arm, which is when you join the fragments and complete the entire operation, then you will take wooden pegs which are placed below the causes which are placed on the soles, and they are made exactly like palm branches; lighten those which have small thickness, and not too heavy, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, from the heel to the lowest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each limb in two layers of bandages according to its length, and place one layer on the fractured part of the leg on one side, and the other layer on the opposite side, and they should extend from the heel to the lower calf.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two fragments in three places at both ends and in the middle, for with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and remains stationary.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a splint made of wood is already administered according to the length of the leg, and it is placed on the leg in such a way that it preserves its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in cases of fracture, and particularly when it is a compound fracture.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg every day and study it carefully with diligent observation, and you should keep it free from abscess or inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those conditions arise, then stop what you are doing and address the issue immediately until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not sustain a complete fracture very often; but the bones of the foot do sometimes sustain fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely sustain fractures, and they do not usually experience anything more than abrasions in most cases.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot become fractured and at times those bones rise up over each other, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared in this way as if walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on something that is raised above those bones, and apply pressure to them, pressing down until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small board beneath the patient's foot, with two convex pieces on the bottom.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen the foot with gentle stretching, since you have wrapped it with bandages and other means that are necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you can unwrap the bandages, as you will find that the bones are healed, or perhaps splinted or dislocated. The treatment for these conditions is as follows:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of the bones are splintered, then you must restore them to their proper place and bind them with bandages in the same way that I have instructed for broken fingers on the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place a splint on the fractured finger in accordance with its length, and make it slightly longer than the finger; and beneath the foot, use the table that I have recommended, and stretch the finger gently.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if two or three or more bones are fractured, then place a splint on each finger according to its size and wrap it in a lion's cloth, and stretch the table low beneath the foot and stand with one end of the table beneath the patient's belly so that it remains firmly in place.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important that you do not forget the various causes related to other types of fractures that I have mentioned, and respond appropriately to each situation as needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the thigh bone in women and the pelvis in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone in women is fractured, then perform this procedure with a saw that has a curved blade, and make a small incision on one side of it, and keep it held back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the midwife should fill the thigh bone with cotton, and shape it as expected; and then the woman should be shaken, and her hips raised gently little by little until everything is in place again and the fractured bone returns to its proper position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place cotton on her hips, and when she needs to urinate, make it easy for her to do so by loosening the cotton, and then return everything to its original position as before, and have her return to her original posture on the cotton.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or thereabouts, as this is the amount of time required for healing.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and stretch it over the incision using a reed cannula; then insert the entire bladder into the thigh bone, and inflate it with air through the cannula until the bladder is filled inside the thigh bone, which will help to realign the fracture.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then the bladder should be filled with cotton and remain in place for several days as we have recommended, until it has healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the pelvic bone in men or women is fractured, then use the same methods and techniques that we have recommended for repairing and realigning a hip bone fracture.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is appropriate is not hidden in these common and minor types of fractures, especially for those who have some training and experience with this material in my book; for the treatment for such a fracture involves straightforward methods for repairing and restoring it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But when the pelvic bone in men is fractured, take goose grease and apply it to the area; then wrap the pelvis with cloth and leave it in place for three days or thereabouts until it has healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the repair of fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for those who suffer from an infected fracture, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or shin bone, to seek medical attention and undergo surgery immediately if the conditions for surgery are met, as we have previously discussed.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection causes blood to flow, then it is important that you take measures to control the bleeding by applying a powder made of three hundred grains of zedoary or another suitable substance if there is some other cause for concern.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to repair the fracture in that same place, and do not delay, unless an abscess forms.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess forms, then you should delay the repair for nine days until it has subsided, and do not approach the area on the third or fourth day after its formation, as this may cause further complications.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin and is exposed, then it is appropriate to reduce it with your hands using gentle pressure and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if you are not prepared for extension and the alignment of the bone with your hands, then use this instrument to reduce it, which is made of iron and has a length of seven or eight fingers and a width according to the size of the wound. It is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these instruments depending on their needs in treating all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be rounded and of small circumference so that it does not bend or compress the bone during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp point with edges at its ends, and be thicker at the top and thinner towards the middle.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre voluntary atelarem," which means a small shovel or spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore it is necessary for the affected limb to be raised above the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And encourage that person to move towards a position where the bone can return to its proper place and be bandaged with some tension.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so strive to bind the ends of the fracture together and, if the broken end is small and not easily grasped with the instrument, then you must insert that end into the instrument so that it has the power to hold it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot realign the bone as we have recommended, then decide what is necessary for the incisors which we mentioned earlier; or saw the bone in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And remove any roughness and small shavings remaining in the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is realigned and the patient still experiences severe pain while biting down, then realize that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and do what will bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	After completing the restoration of the bone, then submerge a cloth in styptic black wine and apply it to the wound, especially during summertime; and avoid placing any wax or other substance containing oil on the wound to prevent purulence and corruption from developing.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer a sedative at the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that it can be treated with forceps and bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take great care not to injure the wound with the fracture, as many foolish doctors have done this, causing death or corruption and decay in their patients, which is pus.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if there is a slight, soft swelling that is different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or serious, and you fear that it may develop complications as we have mentioned, and there is pain in the area, then do not administer a sedative; instead use a hard cloth wrap for support and secure it with bandages.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the wound begins to fester and pus forms, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and instead apply poultices made with substances that are commonly used for treating wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is important for you to loosen the bandages and examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it heals and becomes firm, and the limb must be positioned in such a way that pus can easily drain from it towards the lower parts of the body.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound does not heal after several days and there is still pus present that has not drained away, then realize that this is due to an obstruction; therefore you must examine the wound with care.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those obstructions that remain separated and external, you must remove and extract them; but if they are not separable and cause the limb to swell and create pain, then carefully incise into them to drain the pus.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound becomes inflamed or corrupted with pus, as in cases of stioma or other forms of putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of the following remedies that are described in their respective chapters.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding that which I recommend and you must consider: when the bone is large, it protrudes from the limb like the bones of the hip and the support, similar to those of larger limbs; and do not attempt to pull or extract it, as many have caused death through such actions. Instead, leave it in place for as long as possible, as it will likely fall out on its own after approximately 20-30 days. And then treat the wound if you are able, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodules that form at the site of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times, this nodule forms at the site of a fracture's healing, especially when it is near joints and takes on the shape of the limb, causing it to be easily prevented from performing its natural functions.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, determine if the nodule is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, and others; taking some or all of these substances and combining them with styptic wine, albumen from eggs, or vinegar, then apply this mixture to the nodule using a piece of cloth, and secure it in place with a firm bandage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the bandages in place without loosening them for several days; and then remove them and apply new ones until the nodule has healed; or place a lead plate over it, as lead has the property of healing inflammation in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule has turned into stone and is hard and requires careful removal, then make an incision along its upper surface, remove the excess and sharp parts or any roughness with a scalpel, and drain it using cauterization to promote healing; and treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when the limb remains weak and fragile after healing.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture has healed but the limb remains weak and fragile, this is due to several reasons: either excessive loosening of bandages and inadequate ligament repair; or excessively tight bandages that restrict the flow of nutrients to the limb; or an overabundance of ointments applied; or unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or insufficient blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this condition is to provide nourishment to the patient, promote the relaxation of their body until their blood is replenished, administer baths, and engage in pleasant activities and cheerful pastimes with them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply a poultice to the limb, allowing it to draw in nourishment and promote healing, or continue to apply ointments with warm water until the limb regains its natural shape and form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of bones that have healed crookedly and prevent their natural function.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a healed limb develops crookedness, swelling, or nodules that disfigure its shape but do not prevent its natural function, then do not believe the opinion of someone who claims that the limb has been newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there have been many foolish doctors and healers who have made this mistake in our land, and this operation is highly criticized as it causes great fear due to its association with death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limp and nodules are recent, then they should be treated with warm water containing softening herbs such as elderflowers and chamomile, and a plaster made of mollification materials such as a well-prepared diallage; or use a poultice of crushed marshmallow root mixed with gum arabic or oil of spikenard, and apply it to the affected area; or use ripe figs mashed with pigeon fat, and similar remedies that promote consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it can be resolved with gentle and frequent friction using moist materials, accompanied by regular exercise of the limb in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the crookedness has become advanced and hardened into stone, requiring surgery with iron tools, then it is necessary to cut out the affected area and release the tension in the bone; any excess nodules should be removed using fine incisions, and gentle pressure should be applied during healing.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On dislocation and its treatment.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its natural position, causing it to be immobile and disfigured, resulting in great pain and injury for the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to ensure that it is reduced as soon as possible, and not delay reduction, because if delayed, the area may become infected, and with that, reducing the dislocation becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And to prevent this, one should not be constipated or lie down during the time of infection, because often it can cause spasms and toothache-like pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is better to proceed with bloodletting for the patient, and allow enough time for the infection to subside; then apply hot water and oil on the affected limb, which will make reduction easier.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And treat the entire member with a remedy that will be remembered when appropriate.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have now organized the chapters on dislocation, as mentioned earlier in the section on fractures, from head to toe.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The lower jaw can become dislocated easily; there are two ways in which both jaws may be dislocated: either they are displaced slightly from their position and become loose or they are completely dislocated at the joint, causing saliva to flow from the patient's mouth, preventing them from closing it, and causing the tongue to obstruct their speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the displacement is minor, then in most cases, it returns to its position on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But when the displacement is complete, then gentle manipulation is required to reduce it without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should position themselves behind the patient, and insert their index finger of one hand at the site of dislocation inside the mouth if it is on one side or both fingers if it is on both sides; while the other hand guides the jaw from outside, commanding the patient to relax their jaws and breathe out as they gently push the mandible back into place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer vaporization with hot water and oil, making it easier to reduce without delaying it too long, as previously stated.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And once the jaw has returned to its position and is secured in place, with the mouth closed and not loose, then apply warm poultices of cloth and cerate on those areas, using gentle bandages to secure them in place.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows to prevent turning it to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew food yet, but instead chop their meals into small pieces until their jaws have regained strength and they can eat normally.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let it be administered with ease, without applying pressure to the mouth during meals, drinking or yawning until the jaw has regained strength and healed completely.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and not returned to their proper position, often this results in fever and constant thirst, with a high likelihood of abdominal distension and vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when this occurs, understand that it is a grave situation, and often death can follow in a matter of days for those who experience it.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle (possibly referring to the shoulder).
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not usually dislocated from the ribcage because of its continuous attachment to it. However, sometimes it may become dislocated on the outside, which can be determined by touch or sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And to treat this displacement, the patient should lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then apply firm pressure with your palm to hold that area in place, as it will return to its proper position.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply warm poultices and bandages to secure the reduction.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of the bone that is connected to the shoulder blade and not easily separated from it does not become dislocated on its own; but when it does, it should be reduced and secured as previously stated and according to your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply warm poultices and bandages to secure the reduction, and instruct the patient to rest quietly until they have healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method, the end of the muscle (shoulder) can be reduced when it is separated from its proper position.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the shoulder can become dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it becomes displaced towards the lower armpit area. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glenohumeral\_dislocation#/media/File:Shoulder-Dislocation.gif](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glenohumeral_dislocation#/media/File:Shoulder-Dislocation.gif)
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second type of shoulder dislocation is when it becomes displaced above the muscle, and this occurs slowly over time. This type of dislocation is not located at the back by the shoulder blade or at the front near the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Shoulder dislocation is most commonly found to occur below and towards the armpit area, especially in those with less flesh. However, it may be more difficult to dislocate for those with a lot of flesh.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	It often happens that strong blows or falls can cause shoulder dislocation in some people, and the affected area becomes infected with abscesses or inflammation. This is a sign that it has already been displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, it is important to first confirm if the shoulder is indeed dislocated before proceeding with treatment. Once confirmed, begin by administering closed reduction techniques and follow up with immobilization and rehabilitation as necessary.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The dislocation of the shoulder is apparent when it occurs towards the lower armpit area. To distinguish between a displaced and undisplaced shoulder, look for a noticeable difference in shape, specifically a concavity found at the top of the muscle below the armpit, making it impossible for the patient to raise their arm or move it freely.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the shoulder is displaced towards the side of the chest or back, then the deformity will be easily noticeable and not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	Reduction of this type of shoulder dislocation can be done relatively easily when it is fresh, and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of this type of shoulder dislocation is done by lifting the patient's arm above their head, placing the fingers on the lower part of the armpit and gently lifting the joint back into its place with strength and support. Once reduced, continue holding it in place while slowly extending the arm downwards to prevent it from slipping out again.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if the displacement does not return to its original position after several attempts, and it has only been a few days since the initial dislocation, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and herbs that promote healing and relaxation, such as fenugreek and melilot. This treatment can help soften and loosen the muscles and joints, making reduction easier.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient should lie on their back with a woolen pad placed under the affected armpit, secured with gentle compression. The physician should then place their knee on the pad and lift the shoulder joint gently while another person supports the patient's head to prevent any further injury. With this method, the dislocated shoulder can be guided back into its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If desired, the dislocation can also be reduced using this method: have a person who is taller than the patient stand on the side of the affected limb. The tall person should then place their muscle under the armpit of the patient and lift it upwards towards the patient's head until they are lifted off the ground. Another assistant should pull the patient's arm downward from its lower abdomen, helping to reduce the dislocation.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, it would be better for them to be held by someone else or suspended by some other means, as this will add more force and help the dislocation return to its proper position quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Another method of reduction is as follows: place a long rod on the ground with a rounded cap, similar to a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin. Place the patient over the rod so that they are lying on their back and extend their affected arm downwards towards the other side. Extend their body on the opposite side with force, causing the joint to quickly return to its original position.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction of the dislocated shoulder is difficult for all the reasons mentioned earlier, then use this treatment: take a rod that is two arm-lengths long and has a width of four fingers. The thickness of the rod should be reduced near the armpit area in the following manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And around the rounded top, tie soft cloth or leather to prevent injury to the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the rod under the armpit of the patient and extend their arm or hand onto the rod towards the lower side, then tie the rod to a support beam or post so that it holds the arm in place securely.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and extend the hand downwards while suspending the rest of the body from the other side. This will allow for the joint to quickly return to its proper position.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Once the reduction is complete using any of the methods described earlier, place a woolen pad under the armpit and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered mulberry leaves and egg white over the entire muscle. Secure it with gentle compression and keep the arm attached to the body for 7 days without moving it.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And the patient's diet should be light until the affected limb is healed, as it will aid in the healing process.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then gradually increase the patient's diet and encourage movement after 7 to 9 days, or when it is no longer swollen and firm. Once mobility has been restored and there is no further pain or discomfort, the injury is likely healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint becomes dislocated frequently due to moisture or other causes, then it is necessary to perform cauterization with three incisions in that area, as previously described in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of the above has been done and after 7 days the bandages are removed but the joint is still not healed, and the plaster and tightness have been applied multiple times without success, and the patient cannot lift their arm above their head, then it should be understood that the nerves in the shoulder area have been cut or stretched or weakened, and know that the joint will never return to its original position.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation that is made at the hip and thigh or the parts behind it, the reduction is done by pushing and stretching with the hands, until it returns (to its place).
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other bandage should be applied to that (same) area, and care should be taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is significant swelling in the limb and slowness in its movement during the healing process, then the patient should take frequent baths until the swelling subsides and it returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.[Note: I am assuming this is a new topic or section being introduced.]
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because when you see the leg bent or touched in a certain way depending on how it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with your hand, this is made clear to you manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to act quickly and reduce the dislocation before pus forms, because if pus does form, reduction becomes difficult and it is less likely to heal completely; especially when it occurs in the back, which is the worst of all types of dislocations, causing great pain and requiring many cautious treatments to prevent death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when possible to reduce, is done by extending the patient's arm with two hands, expanding their arms, and placing the doctor's hands on the hip and pushing down until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in front, then it should be adjusted so that the arm is bent with their hand, and strikes the hip with the palm of their hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply violent stretching and great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is recommended that two assistants hold the arms, while two others maintain that extension to prevent it from slipping back during stretching.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arms should be rotated in all directions because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over their hand or loosely.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil to aid in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its movement, then push forcefully until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And during the reduction process, it is necessary to place it on a plaster that contains stypticity and exudation with albumen from egg whites, and bandaged tightly with a descending bandage, with the arm suspended from the neck, and left in that state for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be unwrapped; and when the joint has returned to its place, remove the bandage carefully without disturbing it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then reapply the plaster and bandage, leaving it for several days until it heals, and then carefully unwrap it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is swelling during the reduction of the joint, and its condition worsens, then administer baths with gentle friction and compression until it subsides; or place a cushion with soft movement over the joint, and bind it in that position for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then apply heat and immerse it in a bath; when it dries, gently rub the joint with moderate friction and repeat the process of applying heat, such as a hot water bottle or poultice, once, twice, three times...
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread throughout the inner tooth, before it can be lined.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place it on a wet and scarified cow's bladder that has been soaked in broth or strong liquids; do this several times, because the moisture of the bladder helps to restore it to its normal state.[Translated with help from www.deepl.com/translator](https://www.deepl.com/translator)
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28[^1].
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Chapter 28: On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Shoulder Joint, that is, the Joint between the Arm and the Hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Dislocation of the hand can occur frequently and is relatively easy to reduce, but this is not the case for other joints. However, speed is necessary in reducing a dislocated hand before it becomes infected or develops pus.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	To reduce a dislocated hand, lay the patient's affected arm on a table and have them extend their hand. Then, place the patient's other hand or palm over the back of their hand near the joint and gently push until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, one must consider whether the palm is facing down towards the patient's belly or not. If it is, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction. On the other hand, if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, the patient's hand should be placed with its inner side on the table, allowing the doctor to position their own hand over the joint for adjustment.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that's good. But if not, then strengthen it with a plaster to prevent swelling and leave it alone. Do not repeat this process, as further attempts may be unbearable or impossible due to the buildup of pus over several days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, if the joint remains loose and unstable despite proper reduction, this may indicate nerve damage or entrapment. If the patient reports numbness, tingling, or weakness in the affected limb, it is likely that the nerves have been damaged during the injury or subsequent treatment. In such cases, the doctor should use caution when applying heat or other treatments to avoid exacerbating the nerve damage.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, once the dislocation has been reduced, apply a plaster as recommended and leave it on for five days while allowing the limb to rest and heal. Afterwards, unwrap the plaster and gradually begin exercising the limb to restore strength and mobility.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the affected limb is stiff or swelling occurs, gently apply warm water and gentle massage several times until the symptoms improve.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Chapter 29: On the Treatment of Dislocations in the Toes
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, toes may become dislocated in various ways. This could occur due to trauma or injury, such as dropping a heavy object on the foot or stubbing the toe against a hard surface. Additionally, certain medical conditions like arthritis can increase the risk of toe dislocations.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	If a finger on the back of the hand or the palm side becomes dislocated, then bend the finger and push the dislocation back into place with your thumbs until it returns to its normal position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it (the affected limb) and stretch it into the correct position so that it may be healed in its place on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind the second (bandage/splint) to that narrative (affected area), and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise it with movement, and bind it again at night; and do this for several days until it becomes strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand (wrist), and bind it to that part and do the first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Do the same for other dislocations.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.[*(Note: The original text seems to have used ordinal numbers instead of cardinal numbers.)*]
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the healing of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae of the back or neck become completely dislocated and many vertebrae are out of their places, then there is no cure in that case, for death is at hand for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of this is that the patient's excretion comes out involuntarily, and they cannot hold it in; and often their limbs or two legs or two arms, or one of those, become paralyzed, or a vertebra has moved from its place, for often many vertebrae have moved and often this results in the displacement of those to four parts (directions).
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has moved towards the back and is called "gibbus" (a hunchback).
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the healing of it is that then you consider if this hunchback has occurred in childhood, for then there is neither cure nor complete healing of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But for those that occur by chance or through impact or similar to those, the ancients have mentioned methods of healing in lengthy discourse, from which much can be gained; but I have abbreviated it and summarized it from which little is enough to spare oneself from excessive verbosity, with the aim of better presenting and explaining the matter using various instruments which I will show and expand on.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in hunchback that occurs at the front in the chest, there is neither cure nor healing of it; and similarly when it is made on both sides (lateral).
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except for the one that occurs in the back directly with what I have mentioned (the hunchback occurring in childhood).
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should lie on their face on a soft cushion placed near the wall, and a moist cloth should be placed beneath them so that their skin is not damaged.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then place a straight stick upright, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed near the patient's head, and another stick should be placed at the foot of the bed to support their legs.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And let the attendant hold the stick, and not be fixed in a hole (not deeply embedded); and another attendant should hold the other one in the same way.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and loosely tie it under their chin, extend the end of the bandage to the stick that is near their head and tie it to it; then tighten the other bandage around their hips, knees and legs and adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that is near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And let each attendant extend the bandage to the part of the stick, and the sticks and bandages should not be dislodged from their places where they are fixed, but still, they should not be fastened tightly as we have mentioned.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And let the doctor place their hands on the vertebra with strength until it returns to its place, or place a board on it and let them adjust their legs on the board until it returns to its place.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, then take a board of three cubits (4.5 feet) in length or width and carve a niche in the wall next to the patient where one end of the board can be placed. [*Note: The original text uses "latitut" and "longitut", which both refer to length, but I assume that one is meant to be width.*]
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the patient's weight on the board so that it rests on the vertebra, and let the doctor place their feet on the other end and tighten until the vertebra is constrained and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a hole in the ground near the patient's head at the end of the bed, two sticks should be placed there, each one cubit (18 inches) long, and another two sticks should be placed at the other end of the bed, with a space of one palm width between each stick. Then make a drill hole in each stick that is connected to a rotating handle, and let them be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move. [*Note: I have assumed that "torn" here refers to some kind of handheld tool or device used for rotating the sticks.*]
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round stick with a handle in which the drill is attached, and let it rotate in both holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a drill bit that forms the stick, one palm long, and it rotates; and in the other two sticks, there are similar ones. [*Note: I have assumed "le" refers to the round stick with the handle.*]
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And let the bandages that you have tightened on the patient's feet be pulled towards the hole near their head, and the bandages that you have tightened on their thighs be pulled towards the rotating handle near their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And let each rotating handle be held by an attendant who turns it with their hand, and the doctor aligns the vertebra as we have mentioned.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the drill:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the vertebra has returned and the area is healed, then place a dry paste made with albumen (egg white) and apply it over the wound; and let there be a piece of wooden board, three fingers wide or about that size, and let its length be enough to cover the hunchbacked area around the vertebra. [*Note: I have assumed "ditz" refers to the width of the board.*]
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And let it be bound with the bandage that we mentioned earlier, and let the patient use light nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any residual swelling remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with long-term application of a board (or plaster), which we have mentioned before; and in this case, a sheet of lead should be applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes swelling occurs at the base of the vertebrae in the back, which is caused by dislocation; and this bone is already protruding, so it is not necessary to apply medication to it, as even light pressure can cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the healing of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle are only subject to dislocation, and not to the small movement and concavity that occurs in other small joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, which are: it can be dislocated to the inner side, outer side, front or back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most commonly, it is dislocated towards the inner side, and less frequently to the front or back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the inner side is that when you align the patient's healthy leg with the affected leg, the affected leg appears longer and the knee is more prominent than in the healthy leg; the patient is unable to bend their knee towards their chest, and there is a swelling or abscess near the hip, which indicates the head of the thigh bone has moved forward.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation towards the outer side is that the symptoms are opposite to those mentioned above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation towards the front is that the leg appears straight as usual, but it cannot be bent due to pain in the knee; if the patient tries to walk, they are unable to move forward and their urine is retained, leading to swelling or abscess near the groin, and the walking motion should be restricted using a crutch. [*Note: I have assumed "engonar" refers to swelling in the groin area.*]
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of dislocation towards the back is that the knee does not straighten and the leg cannot be bent at the knee, the thigh appears shorter than the other leg, the groin area is swollen or abscessed, and the head of the thigh bone has moved to the back. [*Note: I have assumed "engonar" refers to swelling in the groin area.*]
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of the types of this dislocation is that you should consider if the dislocation is old and chronic, in which case you should not attempt reduction immediately but wait for the right time; and if the dislocation is recent, then proceed with caution, as forcing the reduction can lead to complications. [*Note: I have assumed "prosompcio" refers to forced or aggressive reduction.*]
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of recent dislocation that is one of the four types mentioned earlier, you should gently manipulate the joint to move it towards the inner and outer sides, and also move it sideways to the right and left; this gentle movement will help the bone return to its place without requiring any further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if the bone does not return to its place with gentle manipulation, then you should prepare for more aggressive measures: extend the leg of the patient, either by holding their hands or using a bandage tied above their knee; another attendant should place their hand on the patient's thigh and gently push it towards the chest; a third attendant should pull on the bandage tied around the hip area to increase traction, while another person holds the other end of the bandage to ensure smooth movement. [*Note: I have assumed "liament" refers to a bandage or strap.*] [*Edit: Added missing line from original text based on u/Aelius_Pseudonym's suggestion.*]
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let there be extension of the affected area or inner side towards the groin, or towards the back to the area near the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let there be extension of all of them (the limbs) in one movement until the patient is raised off the ground and remains hanging in the air.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns with what we have mentioned, it will be good; but if not, then it is necessary for each type of dislocation to follow its own treatment method.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of a dislocation towards the inner side, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their healthy side; and then bandages should be applied around the hip area, in the space between the head of the thigh bone and the inguinal region; and then extend the bandage upwards from the groin to the highest point of the pelvis. [*Note: I have assumed "liament" refers to a bandage or strap.*]
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And let another strong attendant hold the patient's arms and apply pressure to the affected side of the hip, extending it outwards forcefully so that the dislocated bone returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type of dislocation is easier to treat and reduce than the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if the patient resists and does not comply with this type of treatment, then it is necessary to tie both their legs together securely using strong bandages around their ankles and knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each bandage be four fingers wide, and let the affected leg be extended more than the other by two fingers' width. [*Note: I have assumed "ditz" refers to the width of the bandage.*]
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And have the patient be suspended over the top of the beam, and in the middle; and let the distance from the ground to them be the length of two forearms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And order a strong young man to reduce the dislocation of the hip, and suspend him together with the patient, while another young man forcibly reduces the hip joint with strength, as this will cause the joint to quickly return to its proper position.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	However, during the proper reduction, when the dislocation is on the outer part, it is necessary that the patient flex their leg as we have recommended in the previous instructions; and strengthen the ligaments over the affected thigh and the chest of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two poles, one under the patient's feet and the other under their head; and place a custom-fit pole in the middle of the stretched limb over which damp heated cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, allowing for the extension to the lower parts to be unobstructed.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each assistant stretch their respective parts while the doctor guides the reduction with their hand in accordance with the art (of medicine).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you follow these instructions carefully, it will be to great benefit; and if not, then cautiously apply the previously mentioned guidance in the form of gentle manipulation (reduction) on that part.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	It is also necessary for the patient to lie quietly on their back.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary to gently stretch out the thigh as per this method on a mound; and place the palm of your right hand on the affected leg of the patient, while using your other hand to pull it towards you, and use that pulling motion to push down on the stretched part below the groin towards the shin.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to stretch out their lower limbs and they should be raised from the ground; instead, they should lie on a firm surface, just as necessary when the width of the pelvis is dislocated outwards, as we have mentioned with regards to positioning them over two supports; and have their face and ligaments stretched, as previously stated, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply pressure with a board on the area where the joint has been dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction has been completed as necessary - and the sign of successful reduction is that you extend two thighs of the patient, and when you see those equal limbs and the patient strengthens their leg and expands it, then you know that the member has returned to its proper position; then adjust two pillows and apply a paste while also binding the hips with bandages so as not to injure any part; and have the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and the paste, and compare one thigh with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see those equal parts, then know that the dislocation has been resolved and so allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you notice any sign of softening, then return and reapply the paste, and stretch it according to your initial stretching technique, and leave it on for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, and have the patient delay in walking for several days until they are strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle can be dislocated in three ways: when it is dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards towards the back; it is not dislocated forwards.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that you command the patient to bend their leg towards their hip, and if they are unable to do so, then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the treatment for all types of ankle dislocation is as follows: have the patient lie down with their leg extended straight, if possible; place both of your hands on the affected area, and hold their foot between yours; then use your strength to press down on the patient's ankle towards its proper position, while another assistant extends the patient's leg until it returns to its original place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of successful reduction is that the patient's leg becomes attached to their hip without any effort or strain.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a paste and bind the leg to the hip with a bandage for three or four days, and then release it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And the patient should not walk for several days until they have healed and are strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if reduction is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with ligaments as described in the previous treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle joint.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle may sometimes become swollen due to minor injury, while at other times it becomes dislocated as per the natural course of events, and such dislocation can occur either inwards or outwards.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen on the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	However, the treatment for swelling of the ankle is simple reduction and consists of gently extending it with the hands while applying appropriate manipulation until it returns to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of ankle dislocation, when it is dislocated as per its natural course, it is necessary to have the patient lie down, and have a strong and brave assistant stand behind the affected side in the middle of the patient's body.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you approach with your right hand to the upper part of the leg and with your left hand to the lower part of the leg at the level of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the leg towards you with your right hand and use both of your hands for two movements, extending it with your left hand while pushing the heel of the foot towards the thigh with your right hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have said.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the heel of the foot towards the thigh for the third time and you should be at the ankle level.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if the ankle returns to its place in one or two movements with this method and you see that it is aligned, then it's good. But if not, then repeat the operation because it will eventually return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if reduction is forbidden to you with the method we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, place a firm cushion under their buttocks and position it between their thighs, and wrap them in a cloth so that they do not catch cold. [Source](https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=havent+gelbozitat&year_start=1500&year_end=2008&corpus=26&smoothing=3&share=&direct_url=t1%3B%2Chavent%20gelbozitat%3B%2Cc0)
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then have an assistant hold the patient's hips in place while another assistant extends their leg with their hands or using a bandage around the calf of the leg; and have each assistant extend against the opposite side, placing the cushion between the patient's thighs to prevent their body from being pulled downwards by the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then have the doctor manipulate the dislocation with their hands while another assistant holds the patient's healthy hip downwards, as the dislocation will return easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And once the dislocation has returned to its proper position and you are satisfied with the reduction, then apply a paste and bind it tightly with strong bandages, securing the leg to the thigh.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful or take precautions with regards to the nerves which are located at the back of the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not harm it excessively.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it alone for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or fourth day, unwrap the bandages and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient is forced to walk before 40 days, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be re-injured and become infected, which could lead to a lack of healing or cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms in the affected area, it is necessary to provide treatment as we have described previously in our discourse, with incision and application of medicine, until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capital 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Chapter 34: Treatment for Dislocation of the Toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the dislocated digit be manipulated with gentle extension and without much force, as it is not difficult to do so lightly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in any of the knuckles of the toes, then it is necessary to have the patient lie down with their foot on a level surface or table, and remain still as if walking. [Source](https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=ayssi+com&year_start=1500&year_end=2008&corpus=26&smoothing=3&share=&direct_url=t1%3B%2Cayssi%20com%3B%2Cc0)
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you should stand firmly, and place your foot on top of the dislocated joint, and press down with force until it returns to its normal position, ensuring that the digit is aligned and there is no visible deformity in the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a firm and flat board under the sole of the patient's foot, which supports the entire foot with two ends, and secure it with proper and firm support for three days; and then remove it and allow the patient to rest from walking for several days, until they are strong enough and the reduction is secured. [Source](https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=motz+dias%2Cseveral+days&year_start=1500&year_end=2008&corpus=26&smoothing=3&share=&direct_url=t1%3B%2Cmotz%20dias%3B%2Cc0%3B.t1%3B%2Cseveral%20days%3B%2Cc0)
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are made with wounds or fractures or any combination.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When such a thing happens and you attempt to treat the injury and restore it, many times this results in death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And so it is not appropriate to be overconfident in treating it, but instead someone who is wise in the art, with extensive experience, merciful and compassionate, slow, not hasty or presumptuous; and that in the beginning uses medicines that only cause mild abscesses, and leaves the patient to divine judgement, unless there is hope of salvation from danger, along with alleviation of the illness, and some sign of hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And so you should make an effort to reduce it as soon as possible at the onset of the injury, before abscesses form.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And so if the limb returns as we desire, then administer a regimen that only causes mild abscesses and heal the wound with dry bandages that are suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the fragments are separated, then you should align them and do what we have said about simple injuries at the site of those fragments.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And take care and avoid as much as you can any damage to the interior of the body, according to your ability and my previous warning; for this is better for you and more pleasing to your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and truly beneficial to your body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, Albucasis has perfectly finished his words, may God be blessed. (I assume "Albucasim" is a misspelling of the name Abulcasis, a famous Andalusian physician and surgeon)
Amen.	Yes, "Amen" is a way to express agreement or approval, often used at the end of prayers or speeches.
