O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fulfillment of it, and have ended it through its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I saw that I have fulfilled this with the surgery, which is from the hands of women, it is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of women is disturbed in our region and is disfigured as a whole, if it is perceived by science and practice, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in books written by the hands of the ancients that have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And it has come to this error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to think that I will revive this by assembling the order of this cauterization according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will assemble the forms of the burners of the cautery and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is his craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled hands masters are found in our ten, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the judgment of the bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of us, and to have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and limbs, and the number of our joints, and the movement and rest of the limbs, and the issue of the same.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iocras says that the non with the non is not together, and with the hand it is few; and at the same time in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that who are not acquainted with these things, if they do not err and do not harm men; for I have many times seen these who enter into this science and abandon it and its sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a man who cuts off the penis of a woman or from the neck of a woman, and cuts the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issues out that the woman dies in her own hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see if another man who treads on a wound of an old man, and the wound was big; if it is carried with him a piece of the bladder, and he died in three hours.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have already been accused of the cautery, and see the position of the patient and the size of the wound, and if it was cut well, he died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see if another man who was in the care of our king, who had a broken leg, and with the splint he had a wound; and the ignorant ones tightened the break on the wound as soon as possible, and did not leave the wound any slack, and they left it to heal; and he commanded that he not loosen it; and afterwards it was all swollen and the bone and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and I hurried to come remove the leg; and when I free it if it was not in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another mirror that will crumble and fall in amazement, and then burns because of the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when he is free of melancholic humor, only then does one dare to touch it with iron if it is not in its entirety that can heal what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	For this reason, careful women, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: it is knowledge, either to have or to have danger in other dispositions; and I will show each of you in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, you should be careful that you keep yourself in good order, so that the enemy may not speak ill of you. Take your weapons and armor, and put on your armor lightly but firmly, and use the best way possible for the grace of God to save you and make you strong; and let the unwholesome diseases of grief be cured; and keep your weapons in order so that you may come out of this world with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The first sentence translates to: "Galen says in his admonitions: 'Do not take medicine for serious illness, lest you become the laughingstock of the ignorant.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	This translates to: "I have read this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and hot medicine cauteries, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and forms of stings, and burns with cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and ventouses and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is ordered and the forms of stings.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered by the main doctor's hands, and the forms of the sprains.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, it is necessary that we remember the work, I will give the quality of the help and the benefit for each complexity.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the help and benefit is the longest word and subtle science and the secret remedy; and because of this, more people speak of their wounds and agree with them; and they say less words because I do not want to repeat myself.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally with all complexions or matters, for whatever the complexion: it is to know hot complexions with matter, and dry complexions with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, no one and everyone says that cauterization is of great help; and the other says the opposite: that cauterization is only good for diseases that come from chlorine and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated for hot diseases with chlorine, nor with dryness; and that is what the one who says the opposite says, that cauterization helps greatly with hot diseases that come from the courage of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the heart of the man and his moisture at the complexion of fire, you truely see the heart's color.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it at any time by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, it does not interfere with anything more than he who has experienced it and knows by long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and their spaciousness; for other complexions we have no power, just as in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they were able to resemble and align with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization is possible with fire if it is a secret of the healing arts, and even more beneficial than the ardent medicine of cauterization.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and only comes as harm to the member that is cooked, and does not harm any other member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The ardent medicines come from one member to another by allaying, and bring the miseries of the malady to health; and by chance often the patient has too much fire in his substance, but it does not harm if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my research through experimentation and the length of service and study I have dedicated to this art, and it is true; and for this I apologize for the length of the word, as I only want to share with you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, as it treats the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says by demonstrating; and receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Know, son, that the cauteries should be made in the right manner and with proper tools.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	1. I say that cauterization is useful in all cases because the wounds are not properly healed by the aid of cauterization; and moreover, if the cauterization is done for necessary pains and hurts that cannot wait for the time that greatest malice does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	1. And do not think otherwise, it is the same as the folk say; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and he says thus, but it is not so if one cares, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion, and drys the humors that cause the pain, and is worthy of medicine for the hasty death of one's valor, and for the virtue of one's work and ladyship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	1. However, it is certain that the disease does not return once the complexion of the sick person and the lesion of the disease are dried by cauterization; and they are assembled in him, the superfluities being acquired through the acquisition of meat and such things, unless cauterization is administered to him or he has little superfluity and moisture, as with cauterization for pain, and the wounds, and only some pain does not return; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	1. And many people do not understand that cauterization is a part of medicine, and this is seen; but they only believe that cauterization is after medicine, but we understand it is false, and cauterization is a part of medicine because when we administer remedies for any disease and they do not work, we then use cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	2. Therefore, it is well that cauterization is part of medicine, even if some people do not understand it.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	3. The ancients said that cauterization made of gold was as bad as iron, and they said this was due to the quality of the gold and the high content of its substance; and they said that the use of gold cautery did not cause any harm, but it is true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some people; and gold cautery is as good as iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And when you hold the instrument of gold, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and when it has cooled down; and if it is too hot, then it burns in the fire; and then it has enough resistance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that's why we use our fire cauterization that we have made in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or if you have ordered this chapter of the loose joints, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive cauterization.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Olive cauterization is used for moisture and coldness in the head, and when it is caused by a disease called "soda", and by many humors that descend to the joints of the head, ears, and eyes, and numerous dreams and pain in the throat and jaw, and also for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: if the patient is purged by solvent medicine modifying the third or fourth degree of the wood, according to which the virtue and the ease and accustoming of the patient can bear; then I repeat the dose of the medicine.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place the root of your palm between the root of his nail and its two fingers; and if you see your two means, if it bleeds, then wash the cauterization called "olive," which is of the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place the ink of the pen between the nail and its two fingers; and if you see your two means, if it bleeds, then wash the cauterization called "olive," which is of the form: Then apply ink to the hand, and gently press on the hand with the other hand, and if you see the bone, then continue the cauterization as long as you see the bone as I told you; then take a piece of cloth, and soft cotton, and put it on the nail, and leave it for three days; then apply a poultice of the ointment called "tetrafarmacon," as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say to the ancient one, that the more tense the wound is, the more it bleeds; and therefore it helps to aid it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And no one of these says that the fire cautery should be so tight that part of the bone is broken off, and then remove what is broken off from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the fire cautery should be so tight that it breaks the bone, and then bind it strongly to the bone, and treat it. Afterward, it must be treated for a long time overstretched; then it must be cured and dressed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauterization do not seem to be the best in general, despite their effectiveness in certain cases; and I feel that I should leave them alone, as the head of the shoulder is often affected by continuous natural solutions, as we have experienced in other parts of the body; and even when the patient's strength is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems to be more salve and less painful to me, and for that reason I use it in this way.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	2. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	3. When the whole head is afflicted with chronic pain that lasts for a long time, and it must be used with the patient's consent and the pills called "cochie," and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if the cauterization is done as we have said before, and it does not work, then it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the cauterization on each eye of the shoulder bone as we have described, and then making the cauterization on the eye that is called "vassels"; and these are those that are put in a vacuum; and hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will explain later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the eyes be more subtle than those made on the shoulder joint, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes from the cautery, and the disease spreads to the oil, and the head is purged with medicines modified, and the other cures I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of them benefit: therefore, I did cauterizations in two ways, that is, with hot and dry medicine.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If you apply a poultice of alum with medicine that is hot and dry, and it draws out the pus and the wound, then open the temple and place the poultice on the painful part in such a way that you can replace the alum poultice later; when it is replaced, if the patient holds it well and leaves it for 12 hours, then remove it and apply a poultice of comfrey, leaving the wound open for 2 or 3 days; then cover the wound with a moist cloth until it is healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy; and if you see that I write any other remedies that I have written or treat some remedies that are harmful.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is used according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery and its form is:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clout or has a hole like a raven's beak, and appears small; and it is placed on the painful part, and hold the patient's hand and lightly press the iron with one hand while the other half of the edge is raised as high as possible; and gently lift your hand when the artery is no longer red, that is cooled, and there is an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton on the needle, and then insert the limb three times; then put fine cotton in the burrow, and then treat the limb with ointment as it becomes healthy; and if you return to cauterize this wound with the cauterization tool called "cultellare" at all points, and keep away from the artery in this wound that is not yet angry.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have said in divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before dispensing medicine and force does not help, therefore it is necessary that you sweep the cauterization tool called "cultellare" as soon as it is white; and then draw a line of half a dozen of long, and once with your hand, and hold it so that you do not compress the artery and do not strain; and take the mandible that is silent when it is cut, and the nerves only have silence and spasmus does not reach pain, and take decorrement of sand from the artery when it is compressed, or compressed has great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experienced; and leave the wound in its place; but I will tell you how to restore sand when the artery is compressed, and I will show you where it is pointed out in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	1. If you see that the cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed; if you see, administer the cauterization or the chapter of extraction of the artery with the cauterization that has been made; and this cauterization is better than the other.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	2. due to cold ears
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	3. When pain comes to the ear from cold, and they are given medicines in solution and other remedies as we have said in the division, but the pain does not stop, then shave this cauterization which is called "points", and its shape is like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cutting all around the ear, if the patient feels pain in the inner part of the ear, and you stretch out about a quarter of an inch from the root of the ear because you have identified the ear lobe; and do this for each ear; after curing the ear so that it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with fire cautery is only those that move due to fleas, as we have mentioned in divisions of the disease; and do not make cautery like those that come from scratching and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is silent of fleams from wounds and exudations of the cheek and gargle, and it is not worth, then it comes to your attention that you must cauterize the patient with three burns: one at the root of the ear, another on the temple, and the third in the jaw; and place the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and make the cauterization so that the tip of the ear is in a hole made by the corner of the cheek, and another in the temple as long as possible; and leave the cauterization as much as half of it is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the resemblance of the cuttlefish we have placed before you is, but it is a more subtle one and it should be that the cuttlefish is a bit larger; after treating the limb as I have said, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is advanced and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: two at the two corners of the chief, and one on the chief itself, and one on the lower part which is called "vassals" as we have said before, and cauterize on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of cauterization, instruct the patient to let
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient great and large doses of pills that modify the brain; after cutting off the head of the patient, and he puts on the occipital the applicator of snips which is written or treated with plasters; and this is the way of cauterization: if I have done it as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is not sane, it is better; and if he is, make three cauterizations on the head as you descend down the neck, and leave space between each cautery and every other one; and treat it as the others, and if you see any assistance, and the patient is dying, make a cauterization on the mileu; and if mastery is, two on each side, and treat it until it is sane; and if it is called "olivare" cautery, as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and what we have said before; then after the head of the patient is cold, then the cautery is made on the head and each corner, and the nape and III on the spine; and if you have more skill, and the body is moist and the patient is sick and the disease is far, and it is four cauteries on the spine; and it leaves as long as the most painful part is ars, and gently with your hand; then the cure as soon as it is healthy, and it is the cauterization that we call "olivare" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should not be used for cauterization except for those who are fleshy, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot endure, I make a gargle and mastication modifying the brain often with good meats; after giving them water to drink, and I do the cauterization according to what we have said before, and the cauterization on the vein, and on each corne; and if the patient is weak and suffering, I make the cauterization as we have said to the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corps, on the spine of the back and collar, and it is the olive cauterization according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient's hair is long, make the burn gently according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	If due to melancholy, the superfluities or moisture-corrupted and swollen parts are present, then you should use cauterization as we have advised for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the declining superfluity is also melancholy, and the heart of the moist patient is cold, then it should be drunk something according to what the brain is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the heart of the moist patient; after make a linen poultice well made, as you circle it, if you put it on the head; and if the patient thinks he has a fever, and is well held by all parts; then present the liniment, and it is good to add some old borage; and heat the patient to a proper temperature, so that he can endure it; then remove the circle by drenching the head, and let it cool down; and do this once a week with another government boil, as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you look at it, this is done by making many pricks all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization dries out the skull greatly; and then it is put on cotton wool, oiled, and covered with linen grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When hair comes first as signs that I have mentioned in the division, therefore it begins and then drink the poultice thing cleansing the head, and all the wounds, and it is burned more times without eating.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to cut his head, and I cauterize his head, and I cauterize on the two temples where the hair ends, or if it ends elsewhere, and cover all the cauterization all the veins and arteries that are dry and be the cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and it warns for the evacuation of blood, and if you see too much blood, if it is paining you as much as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incising the cauterization as you have burned it; and never once has it been cut or burned off the two bones of the buttock.
dou cors des larmes	Tears of blood
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of blood are old and accustomed, and are seen on the wounds, or in the arteries that appear to be cold and dark; and one sees that it is an excess of cold, fluorescent fluids, therefore I make the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of the descent of the blood: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize where the bones are exposed; and if it is done more, then the cauterization becomes aware of the scarlet a little with every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A large amount of tears through the dens of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not work, then drink olive oil; after that, cut off the head, and do a fire cautery wherever it can be done; and do two cauteries of fire cautery called "clavilis" on the two sides of the artery, a little from the cheeks; and close the artery that you did not cut.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then it is cauterized with this fire cautery called "oliva".
de coi ci est li forme:	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au mala
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that I am doing the cauterization on the two points as the sorels are; and do not let go of my hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The first sentence translates to: "Long hair that does not touch the skin.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	The second sentence translates to: "There is no occasion where the hair of the skin is converted into wool, and it is pricked, and it is treated with cauterization in two ways: that is, by fire or by an ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	The third sentence translates to: "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fourth sentence translates to: "When they are born and are even, then the patient should be examined; afterwards, he seizes a piece of paper and draws a figure that is as large as the fist, and as the beginning of a sign of wool; then he puts cotton wool in the shape of butter and musk on the skin, then washes the cauterization tool according to its form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization of the part that you have cut a few times, and the edges are well-shaped; and the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised at the point of the oil; then gently place your hand, and leave for three days, then put cotton wool in the burette as long as the scar is dry; after the care of ointment as it becomes healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is soft, then resume the cauterization on the same part as you have done before; and if the hair is thin, if the cauterization is done when the paper is raised to its natural point, and is even, and does not touch the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The first sentence to translate is: "The medicinal cautery is that which you command the barber to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a cutting of the shape of the mirror's frame; then take some French soap and live chalk, of each one an .Z., and grind them together well; and make it as quickly as possible, if it does not refreeze, then sprinkle over the shape that you made with the mirror's glass, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease remains only in the oil, if necessary, and it becomes so; and put a cotton cloth moistened in oil in the abscess; and the patient's head of the barber is in your care and shows you the medicine with his mouth, and press the poultice and the wool each time that the barber feels burning from the medicine, because he feels burning also like from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have long-lasting pain, if the medicine does not help you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the stitching is done, if you lift the leg, and see that the paper is lifted as it was lifted by tightening with fire or incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, if you apply more medicine on the leg or the medicine has not taken effect, as long as your efforts are equal, and your wounds are stitched at points; then put cotton wool on it until the swelling is reduced, after curing the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	If it is your duty to care for yourself well in your affairs, then do not despair, as there is much help available for you.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then the medicine should be applied to the previously softened part of the paper as you have done before; after the cure when it is healthy; and this is the form of the glove:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since men are diverse in size and stature, according to which you should follow; and do not reply that the right way is that of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, therefore it comes that you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to cut his hair close to his head; and trim the beard around your hands in such a way that it does not move or fall out; then apply cotton wool soaked in olive oil or persillon juice to the wound; then heat the cauterization instrument that has been divided: and cauterize the hair if it forms like a penpoint of voutoul, assemble the cauterization as the hair; if you see, if one end is cut off from the other, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but always, this that is cauterized is enough for your cure.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it swells and the exudate dries out, and if it closes, it causes the belly to ache; then form the fire cautery, and place your hand on the cautery at the part where the oil is suspended from the belly, so that your hands do not get greasy; then put the cautery in the oil grease, and it corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the fire cautery against the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then repeat the fire cautery once more, and if you must, and leave it for three days; then put on cotton wool in the bure, and apply the desiccating ointment as soon as it is dry, and when 40 days have passed and it is dry, if the bone is exposed, then apply an acrid medicine until the bone is covered; and follow according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient one said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Under the fistula, and put in the forceps; then insert the subtle cautery of this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make it to the quantity of an 'Z' of plonc; and hold your hand firmly on the cautery, and do not move the patient at all, only when the ploncs are melted, and do not touch the oil with your fingers; and it is necessary to put the oil on clean linen or cotton in the abscess or wound of the fistula, and the patient will be healthy for mervillouse health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer tetanus to the newborn, and bring the fistula back to the corium of the newborn according to what is appropriate for the own lear.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks in the lips are called "scalds", and at the same time in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks according to what we have described in divisions, and the patient does not improve, then use a small fire cauterization according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he puts them in those cracks as soon as they arrive; after treating the wound with salve until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the gallbladder or uterus, or testicle, or roots of teeth, and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistule; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit: therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize according to the size of the fistule; after the bog or abscess is drained, and hold your hand until the fire cautery reaches the font of the fire, and when it is done; and once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healthy; and if it is cured once or twice, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the wound and open the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure them with medicines and it does not work, then place the dislocated tooth in your mouth; afterwards wash the cauterization that formed on it, in such a way that you put a thread around the tooth; and pull out the dislocated teeth gently, and hold your hand tightly so that the patient feels the pain coming from the root of the tooth; afterwards gently release your hand and continue the cauterization according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and paint it once an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes softened restricted, and the moisture is corroded dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold, or if it is cold or visible, and the care of medicine does not help, then it has a duty to cauterize according to two ways: and cauterization by fire and cauterization by brimstone.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization by brimstone if it is such that you prefer brimstone over wool, and the end in a iron or steel cup; then take cotton and envelope around the point of a needle, and make the wool burn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly and hold until it is cooled; and often I do this as long as the virtue lives at the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton in brimstone are burning, and place it on the tooth, and place iron charged as much as the flesh lives in the chew of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. The fire cautery is applied if it is such that you preheat a piece of iron or copper, and it is large so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards, hold the cautery, and then place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cautery is cooled down; do this often because the pain will be eased for you or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with hot brimstone in the pressure of this cautery, and then it becomes red; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cut of the kind you want, and according to what you have to do; and this is the form of the knife:
des scrophules	of scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are soft and cold, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then sharpen the knife's edge after it comes into form, and make two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the knife's edge on the abscess once, or as it may be, until it reaches the point of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then put the knife according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and wipe the blade with a soft cloth as often as it is used; after which cure the patient of wounds and infections until he is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au mala
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistors win against the hard parts of the joints, and at the same time when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first have the hot cautery removed by soluble medicines; after that, I will do the cauterization at the base of the throat, and make sure you don't come too close to the throat, and only burn a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, I will do another cauterization at the joint of the other end of the spine, and it is called the "clavicle"; and cure the limb as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the entire
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the face are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, then make incisions with the fire cautery on the parts you wish; and the other cautery is called "clavicle" according to the form that is mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make incisions by pricking at the entire cautery called "points" of the form that is mentioned in the disease of the ears; and let the points be as many as 30, or more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the limb according to what is mentioned before, and let the cautery be made with three rains according to this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason, the fire cautery is lighter, because you do it three times with a copper needle.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After you have removed the patient's clothing and their coat; after loosening the knot that tightens the titillation, it is your left hand that should now touch; and if the joint is dislocated, this is the form of the cautery:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	When the knee is to be cauterized, until it pierces the costal cartilage, and then the force of the cauterization comes together in four points; and this is done with a cauterizing iron that has three nails, because the appearance of cauterization is six points; and these nails are according to the fineness of a tent stake and this is the form of the cauterizing iron that has three nails:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And no time has it been adjusted to this nerve because it has eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the cauterizing iron on the nerve with silk, and then letting the patient rest, and do not force the limbs as long as they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	If it is dislocated, something comes out quickly, so it is done on the large fire cautery clamp or by touching the cauterizing point.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and is affected by moisture and is not hurt by the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come to the stomach, as it is drawn towards its complexion, and are multiplied in the catharsis to it, and according to customary cures, and it does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be seated on his back, extended his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. For this reason, I made three burns on the heel of the foot due to its quantity, at all the cauterization points, and two cauterizations on the knees so that the cauterizations are at least three angles apart and have some space between them so they do not stick together as they sweat; and these cauterizations should be made so that they touch the two parts of the heel, and the figure of the cauterizations should be like this:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	2. And if you see to cauterize the stomach with a large burn according to this form; and the one who suffers from this cauterization, cauterize by touching and seizing on the stomach at the point where you see the quantity that you see; then cauterize all the points that are called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	After the liver comes pain in the head and moisture and large ventosity, as long as it is properly placed according to its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, and if he does not profit from it, then the patient should be cured with cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, deferring the gout of the spleen, whether the blood comes from the stomach or the head; and there should be space between each cauterization of a certain growth of a doe; and they should be long enough in the belly, and not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization; and it should only be half of the liver, and it should be on its own feet; and if it cannot, then it is best if it is extended, and spreads its legs, and lowers its breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If your desire is to burn these cauteries of the dull type, if you are subtle and gentle in the art, and you want to spare all the skin, because you will dry out the entire body; and that it does not become dusty, because the hair is very delicate everywhere, and you want to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has ascended to the liver, and you see if it is in the liver or on the cloth: if it is in the liver, it feels the pain of the great pain but not too much; and if it is on the cloth, it feels sudden pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When this treatment is complete and the patient has regained consciousness, if the shoulder is swollen; then raise the arm or the affected part, and then heat the cautery which resembles a raisin, according to what is appropriate.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cauterization until the skin is burned, and it comes off easily, as long as the wound is clean; after the treatment according to the treatment of fluids as long as it is healthy; and only this cautery should be used without any other means than those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Indeed, it is not easily overcome, and it seems that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cure of wounds caused by thorns
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	It was said that one should use aristolochia roots for the cure of wounds caused by thorns: first, find a long, dry, and very large root of aristolochia, and cut it into small pieces; then heat it in oil, and apply it to the wound between the forceps and the collar, and make two or three cauterizations as you descend in the area that is raw around the beard; make a cauterization between the fifth ribs and the seventh, descending on the back of the pouch; cauterize the pis, and the other in the stomach, and between the shoulders, and the costal pits that the cautery is in between the shoulders; do not press too hard with your hand, as you would with a smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient one said that no man used a fire cautery like the rasping, and they thrust it and place it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the abscess; and the pain is felt, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	However, in this case, there is pain or the patient has died now, or a fistula comes that cannot be saved.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not profit much, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you have mentioned.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are doing three burns or four, according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the cauterization of the belly that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient's blood be on his back; and another way of cauterization is if you shave the cauterization that has two ends, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and ease the knee that is where the hair is, or the pain of the patient comes from the west, and so the elevations that you ease according to the knee, according to the length of the corpse, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the corpse.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After burning the two nerves until they are perceived from the other side, and then use the cautery, and afterwards insert it at four places. If you see, apply cauterization to the entire cautery at three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten rid of the grease by long tense, and this is enough that the other cures are said to be done.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, for it is called "ascites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four caustics at the bowels, and one at the stomach, and one at the liver, and one at the gallbladder, and one at the back of the spine, and one at the hip joint; and make sure the cauterization is close to the end of the curve.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cauterization, let the patient drink long and thin broth, and do not delay the treatment of the wounded after the cauterization; and healing will speed up, and the two understandings will be gathered together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization is made on the abdomen, either by the rib that we show before; and on the back, it is olive-shaped, according to what is in front of it.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the enflaming of the wounds
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the wounds are inflamed by water, and they are full of greenish pus, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the wound between the auricle and the anus; and gently hold the cauterization tool with the cautery so as not to turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much, otherwise it will be too rough for the awl, and the fire cautery should be made according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the sharp point of the knee; and let the cauteries be long, one before the thigh and the other after, in the leg; and leave the cauteries to remain for a long time to cure, so that the awl can enter; after the cure of the other cures we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the mustard
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and nutritious virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are swollen and cannot be cured by common means; and you see the patient suffering very much and of strong color, if I make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what I have spoken of before or on the intestine, the cauterization circles; and four cauterizations are made on the bowels subtly, at all the cauterization points that are subtle, and two cauterizations are made on the gut.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	When you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, perform the cauterization on the point, and the cauterization on each side, and the two cauterizations on the stomach, as the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are either fund or several, and are old and large, composed of cold and moist humors, corrupted, and cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit much if cauterizations are made: III on the spine of the back, which is completely deformed, and the cauterization on the bowel is II doses; and if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face on the large cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder all the cauterizations are claviled; and leave the cauterization over long tens.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound as much as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chalcedony which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply theelul, if the fire cautery seems like a rasps, and then put it all burned on the theelul; and leave as much of your hand as the cauteries reach to the vein's birth, without cutting; do this once or twice, and if it has not enough theelul, cauterize each time as we have said; after curing wounds as much as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound that was not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure tightness or opening, as we will tell in his case, if he comes to illness that cannot be healed by cauterization alone.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula formed, and it is awakened and the patient's milk and moistened food becomes rotten, if you provide it with total rest and keep track of how much it has to rest.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cauterization is washed and the wound is squeezed according to the quantity of blood that entered it, and the cauterization is resumed as long as the corners are curled and rotten, once or twice, depending on the amount of swelling; and the warded nerves that were cut are sutured, and large wounds.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	1. If the fistula is in the course of the ureter and intestine, and it is not treated with these lews, and only by the lew charnut, and think that it is not very serious; after curing the lew as much as it is healthy, and if the lew is excreted, and the matters are long tenacious, then cut off what is excreted, and the matters are sound; and if the matters are sound, know that the lew is entirely sound; and if the matters are not sound, know that the lew is in the ureter, and corrupted the bone at its root. And so one of these that we will say in his lew.
de la maladie des reins	2. Of the disease of the kidneys.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from the head comes on, and is accompanied by large flux of blood, and there is no woman available, then it is necessary that you cauterize the head on both sides using the cautery clavicle that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the field, if there are three cauterizations in a row, and they will be more helpful.
de la vessie	of the uterus
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the uterus is large and weak from pain and moisture, if the woman retains urine, then it is necessary to cauterize the part of the vagina where the uterus is located, either on the left or right side, and one cauterization on each side; and cauterize the back of the vagina, or two on the sides; and the cauterization should be done according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the woman's body is cold and moist, and she does not allow any sweat to come out, and the flow is corrupted and delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: therefore, it is necessary to perform the third cauterization on the bottom, as we have said or cauterization of the bladder, and second cauterization of the back; and if it is a nail cauterization, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip bone, and for this reason if it does not move from its place, then the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the lumps are in the wrong department, so it comes that you cauterize the patient on the hip bone at the cautery point in the manner of a circle, and mark before the leg turns around the hip so that the hip bone is in the circle; and if it is such as those that have been cauterized on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three olive-sized cauterizations on the patient, and let them be as large as all the curls; and the cure as long as it remains healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the gallbladder
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the gallbladder, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of large humors with bitter pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of cauterization is as follows: it is to know how to assemble burning medicines, and to cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cauterization with fire if it is according to the following ways: some are such as follows: that you cauterize on the gallbladder, and make three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make deep and large penetration and space between each cauterization of an inch, and it is olive oil; never again do you cauterize on the root of the gallbladder, because there are four in this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	If you see, if the cauterization is done on the circular burn that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hair; but make it in a manner that the circles contain the entire hair, and all its parts as they are.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then you should cauterize there where the pain is felt by the patient, as the physician has stated that the pain is located, and then cut out the sole of the foot IV times, on the left side a small piece; and if it is a cutaneous burn, and the patient feels that the pain spreads to two or three points or near the knee, then you should cauterize at the point where the patient feels the pain, which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	1. If the masterpiece is to be made, then I will make more; and if the pain is not towards the thigh towards the thigh, then I will burn it with the cauterizing iron or the circular one, and you should keep well in all your cauterizations that you do not burn too much as the cauterization but also the large arteries, and that you will cause less harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	2. And I have seen others who have burned the heel of the foot, and they suffered so much that the leg became all swollen, and the foot also, and it was noticed and corrupted in all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly, where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts assembled, make a burn in one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the burn of the ham, according to this manner, make it like this and so at the end as big as some nails of the finger, or lesser, and so by intersections and so between each other's edges, and the quantity of a new piece; and let the intersections be over two parts, and let them also be like noes, and have the handle of well-made iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be washed as much as it is red and gritty, then place it on the male's chest, and make it curve according to the shape of the chest; and the cauterization is once made and left for three days; then apply ointment, and leave the wound open long and thin; after the cure of the dressing as much as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of its pain, and we see little who use it; and all this is burns, which they can endure, and either they afflict or not.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is: "Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After the patient has been anesthetized with the hot iron, gently press your hand on the sharp edge of the blade; after that, let it rest for an hour in the warm water that is heated in the fire pot, and the patient will suffer from the doctor's chlorine and arsenic.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the burn is similar to fire; and when the burn has healed, ease your hand with the instrument and gently lift the hot iron, leaving it for three days, and then place it as far as the black part of the bandage is; and leave it three days until the sweat appears; and this will be the help from the side after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that tints according to what you have done in the shoulder; and this is the way of the hot tool, and I have written or described the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Prepare alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, mix them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a small hole that can be shaved with a razor and then cleaned; and put some of the powder in another pot, and add alkaline and charcoal and sugar until you have two doses of the powder as you will have it in your hand; and leave it until it drips down with ague and chicory or can be poured, then take all of this and mix it with chalk and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	When the patient is in distress and has knowledge of medicine and cauteries of other parts, it will make a work that resembles fire, and if other medicines are used that burn well, such as oak, anacardium, and chalz with soap, all these things will melt together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galiens tells us of a remedy by which some were cured of the pain of the shoulder and sciatica, and he says that no other cure is needed, and that it was effective once for every time this remedy was applied, and he was bathed in the same way as he instructed after.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And do so in a manner that you pregnant with the cold and dry bath, and rub the belly with a little grease, and put on the shoulder and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind; and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the pressure.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then the patient enters the bath as much as the chest is raised, and I let him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And advises that no one should use such cauterizing medicines unless it is after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Diascorides says that when the scientific vein is cauterized with the fur of a goat, if it helps, then it must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the fat and squeeze out the oil, and put it into the socket that is between the thumb and the other which is called the fossil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry wool of a goat and burning it until it is charred, and then putting it on the hair, and leaving it as long as it remains stained; and then again, and as long as you think that it will reach the bone, and that the pain will cease; this manner of cauterization is called "cauterization with wool.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by touch or percussion or from too much blood evacuation, or from the swelling of cold expanded matter, none of these resemblances is cauterization, but rather for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been freed from bitter pills or other remedies, and you apply them to the back where the pain remains, three lines of encaustic are made, with one line V cauterization or more according to skill and the amount that the patient can bear; and it should be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IV at the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects many children, and the signs of its onset are when they have narrowed eyes as they sleep, and fear; and you see a sharp pain in the back of their neck and the appearance that comes with the other sharp pains.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and it is cured, if it is treated with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery stains every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if it is treated with the fire cautery pointing at the spine, with two or three lines, and they are points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the wound as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and after you are instructed not to use fire cauterization that is in the form of spame of nerf.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints comes from moisture that is spread to each part of the body, and when the pain comes with cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: make a cut around the joint of the pain, and if it is olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if you see that you prick at the face of the child, then perform the burn with the entire burn as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pain comes to the groin and other joints, and this happens many times, then perform the burn on each groin III cauteres or IV of each part, on all the olive cauterization; and if you have skill for more, but do not hold your hand until it is as much as it hurts.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends to the groin and the back, apply the burn we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pain remains in the hands, I make points every second line; and if there is no more pain, I make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes as fleets or as shoulder pains, cauterize each part, and govern the patient's behavior with medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you govern the patient's behavior with medicine and purge the fumes, they will be cured by God's grace.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the face.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in waves, and the blisters descend as clouds and it is new, then if you think that when you see him cured, he will not return to his place; and that he uses things that relieve his stomach, if he descends from his stomach; after which I make him lie on his back between your hands, and command that he lick his nails as soon as they are repaired, and pull them off at your hands, and sign with your finger the closing of the rupture on the bone of the affected hand, and in a sign that is similar to half of a circle around the circumference of the wound; then wash the cauterization of this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and glistening.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then straighten the buns on your leg; and the physician teaches you to mark your hand so that they do not return; and well work on the thighs with the cauterization, and put a piece of cloth and a bandage on each thigh, and the other on the part that the physician marks; then place the cautery at the sign on all your hand, and hold it correctly and as far as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue another one as long as you approach the bone; and be careful not to let the blister come out when you make the cauterization, not to burn it; and so that the physician does not die, or another.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone at the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the size of the bone, and the same for adults; after three days, treat the wound of the cauterization with a piece of burre as long as the burn is ostee; after treating other injuries as long as they are healthy, and gently apply 40 jors on his back until the wound is well sore; and it is necessary that the scars be kept far apart, so that the dung does not come out when he gets up from bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After 40 days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-made bandage, and another 40 days later; then he should rest, so that he can work quickly and not have too much overfilling of drink and mud, and not have too high braiding; and when he teaches this lesson, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they are not increasing, then you should cauterize again according to the quantity, and it is the third part of the keur; after the cure according to what we have said; and no ancient has said that it should be cauterized at the cautery of three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	The shoulder is lifted and a line is made for the width of the fracture, and another one is made, and both hands are placed on all the cauterization clamps.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	The first cauterizations are more gentle and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	There is no pain in any part of the body.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any part of the body, either from chill or wound, and the pain lasts long, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the cauterization point called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb, the size, the strength, the location of torsions and the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first fire cautery is healthy, it's well; if not, restart another cautery on the other part, because it is customary to die in the member that is affected, since it must be cauterized as long as the patient remains healthy.
de meselerie	of misery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The pain is helped once by cauterization, and at the same time the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cauterization, if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and neither delays nor tires, and you doubt that corruption will spoil all the patient, therefore I make you this cauterization: I cut off the head, and the other on the front near the end of the hair; and I touch the horns, and the back of the tail at the end of the hair; and it lasts as much as your hand that the cauterization burns to the bone, and as much as the pus comes out so that the vapors of the large humors may come out; and you cauterize the mouth according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	1. If the burn is widespread; it is clear that if you cauterize with these cauterizations we have mentioned or chief, and the cauterization is in one place, and the cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and the cauterizations on the spine of the back, and the hip and the other groin, and the shoulders and the other elbows, and the wrists and the other ankles, and all the joints of the hands and feet, and the fissures of the hands; and you will have nerves that are burned but not destroyed, which you must not burn; and never made a cauterization on the bone of the elbow, and the other on the stomach, and the other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When you perform more cauterizations, the patient benefits more and does not feel pain in cauterization as much as the healthy one because the body is already corrupted to some extent.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the patient with flour several times with honey and other remedies as long as he is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound comes out in any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then a cauterization is made on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and if the cauterization is entered into at the edge of the skin; then the treatment of ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is made when cauterizing and at the hand, wrist, and back, where the skin is silent and the member is tight; and if it does not swell, none enters unless one knows the members and the courses of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of barbs
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the art of medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery piece according to the quantity of the heat, as long as the wound is tight and red, and of the same color; then use flour and lentils with olive oil and plantain leaves, and salt and alum, of each part; and mix all together, and wrap with a cloth, and apply to the skin as much as it needs.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done on the cauterizer who seems to be a circle, all around the circumference of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the wise ones say that cauterization is done in the environment of the sore; and it seems to me that this is not good, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen once; and the most correct thing is that it should be cauterized all around, at the cauterizer called "circle", if as we have said in the mouth of cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the flesh that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it delays in measuring either due to excessive production or because the patient is too weak (that is, too old) and has little strength, or due to tightness; and you see it suffering from this: therefore, use the cauterization by inserting small cauterizing points as you prick; afterwards, let it heal.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will delay in measuring.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it perceived at all the cauterization, if the cauterization is hot, then it is not in its proper form.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the burn is perceived by the skin, and be such burns that the patient feels them in a way that the course of the pores is closed to some extent.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment when it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease called "corrodens" and is nothing more than a rot of the member, for it eats away at the members as it does with dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the shoulder that can suffer a burn at once by fire, then wash the cauteries with small and large stones according to where the disease is; after all are cauterized as much as possible, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted is destroyed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it lie for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil until the caustic wounds are burnt and all the corruption is destroyed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the care of the ignited parts that generate fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If after three days no healthy fire is born, it is good; and if not, continue the cauterization on the parts that are most corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this is never cured by medicine in the part of cauterization with fire; but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said the cure of the ague medicine in the division: take what you have skill in.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the porings that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happened that the feet were infected with a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that has to be done to heal the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know that it is either burn cauterization or hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Burn cauterization if you are hot and hot water cauterization is similar to a pin of vulture, and is made of iron according to the size that can reach the knot of all parts, and has subtle margins; after it is put on all around the knot, and turn your hand totally over the knot as much as it comes to the end of the knot; and it leaves for three days until it begins to secrete milk; then I make an ointment of well-boiled maggots with a cloth, and leave the ointment on all night, and the knot will be loosened from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment, applying it as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	If the wound becomes infected many times, and in the hands and fingers, then it may be necessary to perform a hot iron cauterization. This is done as follows: take a piece of iron or steel, or a needle of gut, and place it on the nail and the hoof, knowing how to pierce warts; then place the iron on so that it burns everything around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn until the edge of the iron touches the root of the nail, and you will find the hot water way perfectly fitted at the root; then allow the malaides a little mordication of the hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will fall off all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	In this next step, I will create another action, as long as you are aware of all these things that are in the course, then I will treat the wounds that have been inflicted with sharp objects.
li cure dou trembler	I will treat him so he does not tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If he trembles from cold, or fever, or other causes, and you must make four cauterizations or four on the spine, one between each spine; and one on the stomach with olive oil cautery; if he continues to tremble, and soon regains his health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	from pimples that have come out.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	There is no instance where the corpse appears to have bats or pustules that come from large corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to cauterize at the first appearance that the pustule seems to have grown, a subtle cautery of mirror's pitch or of the point that is held by fire, or of the cautery of aristolochia root far, or in the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never is the cauterization done at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and it does not grow new questions ahead, but it is disrupted by the superfluity that comes, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is seized
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are large hemorrhages of blood from the artery that is seized at the wound that comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very serious matter to enrich.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when there is none, if you have to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it as much as possible until it is calmed down by your thumb, and no more pain; then put the olive oil cautery on more or less as many as they are all red; then I, or according to the size of the wound and how it is placed, put it on the vein or where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery on that until it is no longer painful.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If it happens while you are tying the shoelace of your child's vein, and the cauterization ends, then quickly take another one from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after another until the nerve is not inflamed, and no other harm comes to the patient; and be careful that when the artery is not cut, it does not cause immediate pain when the artery becomes large, if it is not through one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization or extraction if it is properly treated, or by gentle pulling with thread, or by medicines placed on it that can cause pain; and be sure to tie and extract it carefully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will be in charge of tightly binding wounds with cloths or other similar things, should not profit from it without doing so.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no remedy or medicine present, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is painful from the wound and the vein; and he should not move much, but his hand should be cold often, so that it does not freeze and become numb and painful; and he should apply remedies before those of cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	1. We have told you in the first chapter of all diseases that require cauterization, either with fire or burning medicines, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterizations; and I put this chapter of the chief's own writing, and I will go to this chapter by my own way because it is lighter to go there.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	2. But if you begin this, it is necessary, as you say, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	3. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I advise you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For people have many ways of treating.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have died so easily due to their disease, and the severity of their evil; and these are the ones we should fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And those who say to you: "Wait, I am in pain"; and the disease is despicable.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It only requires you to allow those who come to you to have this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not give way too easily but wisely of what you are certain, and what you can take and lose; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your maladies as for salus so converted; and this will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of longing.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three-fold prayer, Our Lords give you understanding and uprightness, and if you will seek wisdom from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have commanded this chapter in designing it according to the rules of cauterization, as I have designed the rules of cauterizations from the chief joints, because you will find it more easily what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full-sized chief with sharp edges.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Saiges that this disease comes from the mother many times in childbirth, and when the head is pulled too hard from the child's head; and never has it come from any other cause that it is known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease as an infant, and in these cases the death followed quickly; and for this it seems to me that I should divide the work among different treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen children with acute diarrhea, and the chest swelled each day until it could not sustain itself; and he believed so much that it was death, and this moisture is assembled between the ribs and the skull, from the knee to the skull; and the ovary is such when the moisture is between the knee and the skull, and the abscesses are small, which you can treat with a large incision in the chest; and so long as the moisture increases, the form of the spatulation:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more intense, and the abscess is larger, then I make incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture has made the bone soft, and you see the commissures of each part are overstretched, and the wound gushes out when you press with your hand on the denuded area, and this is not unusual: then it may be that you cut off the head III times according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After extracting the thistles and powders, and pour in wine and oil, and let it remain for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with plasters and poultices, and let the head be evenly pressed, and then massage the dry cheese-like meat as much as the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another way to make an incision is to look at or open the large end of the abscess, and the sharp edge; for it is never beforehand, never behind, never to the side, and never to the bottom.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, the size of the opening should be according to what you have; and make sure not to block the artery; and come down with the blood, if the patient dies from the blood and the evacuation of pus.
de reume	of the humerus.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is no disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or ears, and the disease is ancient, and the cure by medicine does not help much, therefore it is cured with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	1. It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient is held in place; afterwards, rub the leg with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then tighten the cloth around the neck all along the leg; then look to see if the pulse is fast and both sides are after the ears, and they should be equal; then make the legs warm by dipping them in cold water until the size comes close to the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	2. And if you see, dip the cloth in cold water until the artery is found and wrapped around the neck, cutting it according to how much is needed.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, if it does not stop bleeding continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open immediately, then measure the amount of blood that flows out, and if it is more than three drops, then press on the bone and let the blood flow until six drops have been collected, or a little more or less depending on what the patient can bear, and the completion of the artery; then look at the wound: if the cut does not stop at the bone point, and the coagulation that was sewn does not come, then tighten the wound and ligate it, and the treatment with ointment as long as it is healed.
de emigrainne	The first sentence to translate is "de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the head aches greatly, and the eyes become red, due to moisture from tears and sweat, and sometimes other similar things, it is treated with medicines of medicine and all that does not benefit him, if we cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient has many hairs on his temples, and he understands the artery that is open in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and it is quickly repaired as in no man who is too foolish; and if it is repaired, then he grips the collar of the patient's hair with his hands, then rubs the neck with some rough hair, and wets the neck with hot water until the artery is clearly open; then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly burn the soft leather until you see the artery, then tear it at the top with your nails, and pull out as many threads as possible from each part; and if the artery is subtle, and the turn is at the point of the uncinate bone, then the coil of that part follows according to the number of the 2 chiés.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not coiled, then it will not hold at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And tear out 6 sanc des VI c/, just as much as III; and if the artery is large, then it will hold if you tie it in II leus of a double strong silk thread, so that nothing comes before the wound, and comes undone from the sand; then cut off the excess that is between the II liiens in that hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization is as hot as the cautery cuttle, so that the chiés are coiled; and this is the best work, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is help to finish the moisture: for it is of greater aid to moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	If it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, fill the vein with soft wool and put on well-made tents; and if you loosen them, be sure to use dry medicines that make water run, and tents, as long as it is healthy; and if there is no cut to the artery, so do what you can with cauterization, or use your legs and hold the fire cautery in your hand until it is not frozen; and if you don't have this present, put as much of the leather of your thigh as possible on the fire cautery so that it does not freeze, and keep it wet with cold water until it is no longer, and be forced to extract; and what is most difficult and lightest in extracting arteries is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching from II part, but the trenching should be well spaced to last longer without chloror.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the head is too sharp, it holds less charm.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two incisions, two pieces of iron that are large enough, and then when you have filled the two holes with them, heat them until they glow red before touching the vein in the holes; and let them be far apart at the ends because it is not safe to do this cautery all over the place; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are falling down the veins that are being cut with iron that is too hot for the fire, and it does not profit at all to take medicine, and you see that the face of the patient is swelling, and it seems that the hair of the papers is being cut, and the papers are being burned by the heat of the tears, if it has any effect on this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the "old "cure contused", and that is, when you have this disease, let the patient shave the hair on their head or face, then make three cuts or shavings on the face according to the length of the face; and one of the cuts should be made using a razor, and the others should be made using scissors, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are caused by the scissors; and separate your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound should have three doses of III at the joints; and you will have appeared a piece of sponge and moisten the wound with damp cloths so that the pus may exude from the wound, then cut off the crust that is formed.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	1. From the incision that is made in the temple, up to the second incision; and scarps all the tissue that is between the two fangs of the entire facial bone that is seen in the bone, then makes another part of the other second incision, and then extracts this spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	2. If the bone is bitten in the first fang with the instrument called "cultellary", and is very sharp on one part, and very blunt on another part, do not make it sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	3. And cut the costeit (shoulder) blade towards the arm, and make it blunt towards the bone, and the bite as much as it comes to the second fang.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And cut all the veins that drop out as much as the incision continues until it is fully open, and then another part makes the other end open; and then draws out the blood evenly, and expresses the leeward for the blood taken; and then puts a piece of soft cotton in each fendure, and puts flax brushed in wine and oil and vinegar, and keeps that the apothecary's nose does not come; and at the end of this, deslime the line, and then apply great amounts of tincture of wormwood with olive oil, and other ointments such as those used for wounds, as long as it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	The first sentence translates to: "He grabs the hair.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	The second sentence translates to: "For if no catarrh comes naturally, and you see the hairs thin and brittle, and the papers burnt; and the head is aching, and the face red, and the maidens are weeping; therefore, be careful with these accidents that these materials and this catarrh only come from many veins, and the cure that it has is if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	The third sentence translates to: "And is that you command the patient to cut his forehead, then make a deep cut on his forehead, and another large one in the pit.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	The text describes the process of treating a temporal bone fracture on the left side of the head, making an incision into the bone; removing the hand from the nerves of the temples that move in the mastectomy; when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out onto a sponge, then place between the two lips of the incision and put cotton on it, and sew with linen; then cover the rough edges with moistened vinegar and oil, and keep away from infection; when it is healed, if you rub the bone until it charred and began to rust, then the treatment of things that cause excision, which make the char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In one manner, take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of flax, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds for healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear's sweat
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of the four things: grains, or fat, or mine pit or similar thing as if it were made of iron; or seed, like beans, peas, or peas; or something that flows, like phlegm and pus and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes out of the ear pit or in any other way than what sticks to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the piercing, and it does not distill any drop of violet oil or marrow oil, then extract it; and I make the congestion disappear, and it snores when it exhales, and put in the ear pieces of linen or wool; and the ear is at ease.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment often comes out; and if it does not come out, then extract it with fine tweezers, as follows is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with tweezers, it is good; if not, then extract it with a fine hook and double needle; and if it does not jump out, then make a small cut in the ear and pull the tip of the ear or the canal; and sniff the part that enters the ear with wax if it comes without entering with the ear, then form it as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take some cotton and insert it; then press the wax on the piercing or whatever it is, and extract it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, if you persist in hurting her ear despite the chalk and vein spasm; and the way of hurting it is to first clean the male patient's head with the mouth of the helmet, according to the measure of its strength, then hold the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear towards the opposite side, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or depending on the ear; and the cut should be like a moon, as you move towards the piercing, then the bone according to your power, and the saliva runs to your mouth; and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grainy and it swells, then apply the extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then apply the spumous substance according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make the incision if you think the grain is moist from the ear's moisture, as many times as you need to; then extract it with fine forceps and the wax, as we have said, if the extractions are healing.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ache, it is necessary that the ear be treated with proper care and ample cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let's say on the same ear where the arrow is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it doesn't, then take several incisions along the length of your arrow, and heat them slightly; and put the cauterizing iron on one side of the ear, and touch the other parts of the ear with it, and continue to make these incisions in one ear after another until the arrow is all out, and when it jumps, it will be all out; and if you see, if it jumps again, and burn one of the ears, and the other keep it in fire as long as the more painful one is out; then repeat the other parts of the incisions as many as the arrow is out, until the arrow is all out, as we have said in the ear.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small, like a pea and similar, it is treated as we have said in division; but if it is large, one can feel it, if the extraction of pincers is made; and this is the lighter thing to do in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the ears' rings, if you treat it as we have said in division and if you use distillations, and this treatment does not benefit, then look at the ear with the sun: if there are no holes, if you open them with subtle pliers, and if there are, if you take the rope of here is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight and wide around.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And cut off the end of the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then it will form into a complete tail; do this often as many times as necessary.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not shed, then soak the tail in cotton as I have said in the incision; and if they do not soften as we have said, then apply distillations that the ancients have used in the decision of the verse, and you will find them or the medicines in the ear with this instrument; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear at all times, then the form will be as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And let silver or gold be melted into the small pits, and then cooled down; and to press the distillation with a well-made silver instrument, and see if you have the vase and envelop it around the tip of the cotton; then let your oil or juice gush out, and what you see of your medicines in the case, and the case is in the ear; then take the rasor and shave all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes from the ear; and it will feel cold to the patient, and so are the distillations in the heat unless they are distilled in the ear; and keep it not too cold, for the medicine will not be effective if it is too cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the cold of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without having a cold in the ears; and this very thing happens due to a cold in the chest or an earache, and there is no sign of any discharge from the ear, unless one can see; and never has there been a puff of snot, and it is well seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes out is of grief in the healing in more positions, and in this case it is necessary to put the ear with cold in the sun; and look at: if you see the exudation apparent, then the ear has completely formed this salty substance.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so, and also, shave all the hair from the head, if it does not hurt the ear; if the exfoliation is of a thin layer or a curl of the ear, if the hands are gently pinched, and the cup lightly, as long as that layer is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the exfoliation is complete in the ear, if I take a gentle razor and scrape a little with fire, then he puts or curl of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the exfoliation that the patient feels pain in the ear, gently pinch it, and keep your fingers off the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the large part of the pustule, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Do nothing until the wound is healed, or take a tent and soak it in hot water, and add some rose powder; and if you see blood coming out of the ear, then tear the tent and move another wet tent made of oil and wax, as long as the ear is bleeding. Then apply the cure once it is clean and dry.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. If the wound continues to bleed, then dip a sponge in cold water and wrap it around the ear, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the flow of blood that are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the book of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	That is the best way to treat wet hairs that come from papers when they are dry and then, if you extend them with needles and tweezers, and place them on a piece of glass with its roots; then put the lew in vitrol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it is not decorted, then the cautery subtle cautery will be used, and the cauterizer after the incision will be enough; and they are often repaired, and no root grows out of them; and when they are cauterized by fire, their roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l'ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l'incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	1. If the snow is descending towards the earhole towards the part of the ear, and if you reverse the paper, and the snow is held with tweezers, and the paper is pressed from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by incision, it causes no harm; and when the snow is applied, if you lift the oil of bitter salt, and cure the ear from which char is formed as much as the malady allows.
de la graisse des eulz	1. of the grease of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	1. Exinach is a grease that is engrained in the papers of the children, and this happens more as time passes, and it causes pain to their hairs, and they come to the catharsis in the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because their tears are on their hairs; and for this they lie down with their faces covered, and sleep, and their papers become wet with the exinach that oozes from the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on your knee and feel the excruciating pain inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the incision if it is that the barber sets his finger in your mouth; then take a piece of linen and make a circle according to the quantity of pain contained in each part, then put it on his finger; and press with both hands on one side and the other, so that the pain is assembled within the circle; then make a cut in the moisture at the corner of the nail, no larger than the wound you make in the gum of the mouth; and make the cut as long as you see the pain; and in other positions, the pain comes from the cut, according to the form of a piece of greasy white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. "Tear the cloth into pieces all of them between your two arms at the deflowering, and turn your hands to the right and left as much as possible; and make sure you do not push in the fleece, that you do not get to the whole satin roll, that you do not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. "If the fleece does not open at the beginning of the shaving, lightly shave the beginning and see if it opens; then tear as we have said, and wet the cloth in vinegar and water, and put it on your arm, and hold it tight.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	If such men break their seal and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is already damp.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor, when he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes to the head, then the doctor should apply dressings that are soft and healthy as much as possible.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers' hairs.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers are born with hairs other than their nature, and they are dried out, if they harm the hairs, and bring about diseases such as tears and mucus from papers and albugine, until it is caused by the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is done in four ways: either by burning together with fire, or by medicine according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is made by incision and stitching or by needles, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	1. It is necessary that you place the head of the patient's shoulder in your hand, then turn the paper around in your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert an awl into all the threads of the filament; and let the margin of the paper or the hair that comes from these hairs be on the left side of the paper, and turn it at the razor; then cut in the part opposite the shoulder, adjust the hairs, and all the staples are even, then remove the thread, and put a small tack of cloth and thread on the paper, then sew a figure on the paper that resembles the amount you see rising the paper that is marked with dots.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body has a wound that requires a large amount of paper according to its size, then cut a piece of paper that is malleable; then cut it into two equal parts, and start with the largest loop at one end, and then bite off the root near the natural hair in its growth, then burn the nail at one of the two angles, then scrape off the rest; then assemble the two lips together with a needle at the tail of any fine thread, and remove the sand, and make sure there is no superfluity on the threads at the ends of the hair, if you see this done; and if not, then leave the stitch and the threads as they are for three or four days; then cure the wound with the stitch and the threads that are dry and constricting, because the paper relieves the wound and its assembly, but the stitch is dead (as they say the ancient ones), and it is over for pain; and if in another way: and it is that you see the paper of a figure that is as well-made as the fur of the marten, as we have seen, at three incisions it will follow the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes the one who surpasses with small forces according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	Then comes the one who surpasses with small forces according to the form that is here: If you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or if it has one thread, and pull out the fil; and take another thread of the great larmier, and the small thread of the little, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then gently lift your hand evenly, and gently sew all the edges where you have signed, as we have experienced, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it as soon as it is healthy; and if the suture comes to your incision, if the pain and swelling ease; and never has there been that the hair of the paper is converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The patient's shoulder is dislocated; if it is dislocated in this form: then you convert the paper according to what I have said, and then make the shoulder by art, and make it tight as the paper and the long threads are; and hold the heads of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly over the paper of the oil, and draw the shoulder from the parts formed; and leave no others, and the skin that is stretched will fade and turn yellow and wrinkle, as long as it touches it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If the patient is delayed and the force is applied, then treat it as soon as it is healthy; and if the wound is sore, and if the paper is lifted, and no hair is tied, and this is the form of the shoulder you will make according to this figure and quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The first line of the translation is: "The dislocation is such that you need a fine needle, and a piece of silk thread; then assemble the heads and gently pull them apart, and make the ends of the threads as long as possible; then cut off the other fine silk thread, and pull the heads; then put the sutures in your mouth; and if the sun is out, so that the dislocation is visible, because it is a delicate one and small, then cut the needle all through the thread in the root of the hair as far as it grows naturally, and trace it on paper as you pull it out with your natural hair; then pull the hair until it comes out all the way through the thread in the paper, and pull out any hair that is left, if there are one, two, three, or more; then pull your hand as far as the hair comes out all the way through the paper with your natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	1. If the animal is captured and its hair does not come with it, if you command the capture at the end of all that you have commanded, as long as the animal comes without much pain and you see it through your vision of the oil; then if you command the capture and the oil, let the oil be closed and leave the hair loose for two or three days, as long as the hair grows in its place and gives birth to the whelp; and if the hair is short, if it is accompanied by one long tail of nature, and is separated with that which you have commanded, as long as it is elongated and then tied.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fat
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil comes in two ways: naturally, and unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of the ointment is that you apply the suture, and cleanse the lips, and put on linen sheets, and keep it as long as it is healthy; and nothing else is needed in the cure of it but using things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than the first; but it works things that are softening, like fenugreek; and the astringent or althea and linseed seeds are cooked, and all oils are melted, and they are wrapped in a cloth, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	The treasure of your cure is that if you guard it so that it does not sound like according to the form it was before; these remedies that we have said are none other than prescriptions of this disease, it does not relapse according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "axacrati" is truly called "axacrati", it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounding and burning and cauterization and similar things; and the sight of the patient is that if you insert an awl, if it has two threads, and the char in the oil, and it feels different on the left side as it should be, so that the threads come into the head of the char; then the char is in the ointment all over the awl, and the cope in the large spumous part.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the paper seems to be in order, it is well; if not, take the razor and put it in the furnace, turn the paper, and make as many furnaces as the paper requires; and let the corners of the incisions you have made be like the letters of a letter that does not have "I griesche"; then heat it according to the amount of fire that is on the edges of the razor, of which it is held, and adjust the remaining parts with a linen thread; then apply the remedies we have mentioned for mollifying medicines and plasters, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	1. If the illness comes from burning or cutting or cauterization, then it is necessary to remove a simple incision of the hair from the papers, according to what is before; then proceed between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the shape of the disease, as it is different in shape, and the skilled masters arrange the tools according to what is possible to return to its natural form; and the illness itself, according to what is necessary for cutting and excision in more positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	1. If the paper was soaked.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. When this cauterization comes to the hands of women in such a way that the paper on it is stuck with white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural acts, then it comes that you cut the point of a razor with the paper, and lift it up; and the pincers, as long as you cover what has been touched by the subtle spumous, which is neither too much nor too thin, so that the patient can suffer neither the spumous too much nor the oil bleeding; and your incision, which you scrape of that assembled, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and it becomes whole, and none ever occurs in the acrid cold oil, and the levant is gentle sweet, and warm; then put between the paper and the oil a piece of linen, and put on the oil smooth hair in a lot of wool; and afterwards the third day use cold and things damp as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the thumb of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the thumb is like: it is nervous and resembles hard sauce, and another that is not nervous but resembles cold waxy ice, which when touched with iron and cooked with pincer forceps, if it does not open; and both of these resemble towards the great larder, and grow poc and poc as it covers all the eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision if it is that the surgeon places his finger in the wound, then he operates on the nails; and gently touch the paper with your hand, then take a needle, and put the horsehair, or sheep's hair, or beef hair, and the strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and the thread enters the nail, and perforate all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and set it at the wound, and scrape all the hair from the costeit of the nail which extends the purple and silk to the chief's root, then cut off the remaining in the root of the larder with small forces, and leave the natural or larmy char, if by the incision there comes no water to the usual cost; and never has the thumb been set in the oncine only, and through it, as we have said; then scrape all the spatumile souffle of coi ci is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the swab not touch the charred skin and break it, and the pruning tool should not be perceived; then in the oil, a small piece of wool is squeezed out, and a litargire is made, and it is left for the other day; then the care of what is needed until it is cured.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the ring is not nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the thorns cannot enter, this appearance of a ring of medicines is often treated; and I have seen many times in division, and if you see it closed, then use oil on the skin of the patient, and take a light swab according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	1. And cut the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not harden and the reason is that it is too thin, then distill from your mouth the oil made of lactrudine and red colior and seal broiet, and it will stop the oil from juicing to the other day; then continue the other excision according to this same work, as long as it is entirely dry.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If nothing is contrary to the oil, as with an abscess, then the milk, and first treat the abscess as soon as it is healthy, and then continue the excision as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	When the flesh of the arm appears in the oil at night due to great exhaustion, if the spleen is also involved, and only a part of it, then tears do not come; then it distills into the oil that is red like blood, which is made from litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the arm that was pressed on the plum
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men have never been red-haired, and they cut the plum and tear off the leaves and tie them in paper and make it look like a rose of balsam; and if the patient's skin is sensitive, then the oil is applied to the skin, and then the hairs are cut, and all the red hair is cut short as possible, and it is held together with force; then the first cut is made, and all of it is shaved down to the end, and make sure you do not let the oil get into the wound; and this incision is like the one we mentioned in the incision of the toe and small forces of the hand, if only the bone is formed after this chapter as it is demonstrated in this chapter; and when the incision is completed and all the hair is cut, if you use oil of silk or red blood and resemblance medicines corrosive, and put it on the warm oil with a piece of linen, so that it is assured of aphrodisiac chaut; and if it does not cost anything, and the without hand overthrows it, and you doubt aphrodisiac chaut, if leave the oil and cure aphrodisiac chaut of things soothing aphrodisiac chaut; then return to your wound as soon as it is healthy, and then make many cuts in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you treat every weak point of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in fire cautery; and do not force your hand into any of these burns as long as you see that the other member is suffering from that burn.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered with oil, and they touch the vein with their tip and blunt the oil for all future uses.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil, and if it is thin, and there is no other disease but the oil, then the treatment should be as follows: instruct the patient to put his head on your hand, then stretch those veins all over according to his judgment, and let the veins become double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	1. And let it be known that one is made according to degrees in one course as per this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	1. Then, gently apply forces to those veins subtly, and remove the blood as soon as you can; and be careful not to cut the skin with your nails, and do this operation around midday before the sun, and work quickly in your operation so that you do not lose any blood; and when you have done this, distill the green and red oil into it to corrupt what is left.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	1. And if you cannot cut all of it in that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the hairs, and leave some parts until the pain is soothed and the gums are secure from gangrene, then resume according to this method as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fissure of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He notices if the fissure of the oil is infected: when you treat it with cauterization and by burning hot medicine according to what I have mentioned earlier, and it is not healed, then it must be opened, and all the moisture that is in it should be removed, as long as the wound is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the wound is exposed, and you see the infection and blackness, if all the instruments of this case are made of this material; and it is called "sharp chief," and should be made firm in the chief, and should not be cut like a knife as it is in its present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	1. And put on your hand the broken bone of the bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand a little as you feel that corruption is removed; and do this no more than once, then restore the bone with remedies that are excising.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	2. If you hear that it is sore, and charred, and the belly is sore, and it remains for forty days, and it does not relieve and is not apostemes, and accidents do not come, you suspect that it is healthy; if not, then there is no other means than to return the fistula to the navel according to this form: and it is that you break the bone twice by hammering and by remedies that are excising, and when it becomes sore if you press it according to this form, and if it pains so much that the head of the iron is at third angle, and the fistula is at least at third angle, and the head of the iron should be as soft as possible according to what you see:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the handle of the cauterant on your thumb, and gently move your hand away from the oil, then turn the entire forearm until it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you are holding your hand on your cheek; and then restore the dry medicine leg with which I have shown you, and when the cauterant is heated and hardened, if the matter is in the cheek, then it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is fully open and there is no discharge from the cheek, and there is no vomiting or aversion, then you must apply the salve to the patient; first cleanse the wound with warm water and soap without hurting it, then put on the ointment made of lard, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then apply it to the bands and cloths; if the bands are too wet, double each one, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the patient can hold; then let the bands dry and form hard knots, and resume the ventouses until they stop hurting; then loosen the bands and leave the ointment drawn tight for a day and night, and if it is not loose, then after the day and night, if you see the ointment healing, it is good; but if not, then continue the application of the salve and the bands and the ointment as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	1. When a disruption occurs in the eyeball, it then opens up, and paper pieces come out like grains of resin, and it is difficult to see; therefore, close your eyes and the ovary is such that you can insert an awl at the root of the affected part of the eye, then insert another awl if there is a double thread in the affected part; and make sure, and leave the first awl according to the disposition; then cut off the double thread and tie a part of the eyeball with it, and pull it firmly, then remove the awl and put some ointment on it in a large amount of ointment; and leave it as long as the threads are tied with the eyeball, then cure the ointment with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never leave the wound uncovered by any part of a circular bandage as soon as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs have grown long and even, if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is only eyes that are assembled in the oil, resembling a watery descent, and it is not watery; and the way the appearance of the dislocation appears if you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take the cheek between your hands at both sides, and pull as far as you see the eye coming to the end of your hair; then close your eyes, and do not let the light out, and see the patient's things as they were; and if it does not come out, say that it is watery, and if the water comes out of the eye is not assembled like we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient's arm in your hands, then take the sharp spatula and make a small incision under the corneal membrane as far as the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal membrane and the eyelid, until it is removed; and when it comes out, let it drip into the cold, hot water melted in honey, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment as soon as it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearance of the waters in the division, and when it is necessary to perceive; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	1. It is necessary that you place the oil between your hands crossed, in the light of the sun, and let the healthy and tight oil be well mixed; then take the paper of the oil to your left hand, where the hairs are on the left, or to your right hand, where the hairs are on the right; then take with your right hand, where the hairs are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand, where the hairs are on the right; then place the point of the instrument at the corona through the greatest part of the rait in the blenchor of the oil at the smallest part of the larmier, then force the instrument called "almagda" gently, and pull your hand so that it pierces the blenchor of the oil, and feel that almagda enters the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda's mouth be at the end of the measure of the espaice which is in the prunele to the end of the nose; and this is the corona of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornered cloth, and then place the instrument where it is needed, and press the corner with a vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the patient becomes agitated now, if they see the surgeon in front of them and the instrument in their hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After taking a short rest, if the patient becomes agitated again, place the forceps with the instrument, and when it is firmly held and does not move, lightly twist your hand a few times; then take a piece of silk and lift the oil out.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then use the forceps to remove the ointment or finely crushed oil rose and excess of urine, and apply it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those who are of our kin, we will apply them with a cloth full of urine.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the maggot cannot enter the wound due to its hardness, because it has too many sharp hairs, then you must first use the instrument called "alderman," which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive, and do not pull too hard, but make a small incision, then let the maggot out, as we have said; and at the end of the work, the patient should be lying on his back in the dark room; and make all movements lightly, eat soft foods, and do not move his head to the left or right, and follow his disposition as much as possible; then close the wound in this dark room, examine his eye, and let him see something, and then put the bandage back on the next day; but it is only necessary to do this in the mouth of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary to do it, because the swelling goes down quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	1. If the patient experiences pain, move the oil in front of the seventh day and address the one who soothes the pain; and when it is calmed, remove the eye and place it in your face or on the floor to cover any joint, and be careful in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then remove from the house, and convert yourself to your case; and be careful that no disciple should intermeddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came from the Yrach who told us that in some ways it was a remedy for the fever, but I have never seen any of this in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in ancient books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of the cauterization, because those who do not know them properly; and they are truly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the base in three angles at a right angle.
de la char sor le neis	of the fire and the needle.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No fires or needles are ever born or become different, and if there are any that seem like scorpions at the mouth of the pie; and if they have a fire enhanced with fuchy color, and if they have a fire of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these fires which are not enhanced, and do not become enhanced, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands before the sun; and operate on their noses, and wet the onions with those fires, and draw them out; so that you may be able to hold them in the subtle substance of a part, as long as you can see that the fire is completely extinguished.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there is nothing else that can be done, if you examine all the surgical instruments lightly and subtly, without causing any harm; and if you do not have an assistant, or if you have to operate alone, and if the wound is malignant, then cauterize as much as possible and burn until the bones are charred and the wounds are all closed, then gargle with warm water and apply an ointment or a poultice.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If you do not have any moisture, and the wound is dry, then it is healthy; and if the wound is not charred in the bone, then it has not penetrated the bone, and the instruments cannot be trimmed: therefore, it is necessary to tie a knot with a piece of linen as large as possible, and use your hands, and place one between each tooth or less; and put the end of the thread in the child's mouth as soon as it comes out of the gum, and carry it around until it comes out of the mouth; and often do this for the child in schools, and it is a light thing for those who see it; then hold the chief that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other chief that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and follow it after the other until it is all done.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Until you know that the child has corrupted the char, take the child's penis, clean it, and wipe it with Egyptian ointment, and then put it back in the urethra as before; do this 3 times or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the char; then put a catheter of plastic for some days until it is healthy, and if you have knowledge of dried herbs, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the child's penis, or when distilled oils and medicines are needed.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	2. And it should be of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a leash, and it is led thus; and if you see, if a leash is closed, and the purging fluids reach the child's penis, and there is one hand on the penis to hold it while heating the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the char of the knee
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times it happens at the head of the knee a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large, so that it is a sight to behold; therefore it is necessary to cut it off at the beginning, and then remove the bone entirely, and then put on the fire cautery or hot medicine; and if it is delayed as long as it is large, if it is hard, of dark color, poor sensation: if it does not touch iron at all because it is enchanted, for when one cuts it once, no harm comes to the patient; and if the enchantments are many, not of dark color, and you see that it can be covered, if the patient is open and the mouth is closed, and cure the leu of things loose and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the wound is cleaned and dressed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When it comes to the continuation of treatment, one of these cartilages is inserted, and does not last long, for no one.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to do this if no one comes to help, and if the wound is fresh at all points; and then apply a bandage, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already sunken on both sides, it is necessary to scrape off all the parts that are healthy, and then assemble the lips in a bandage, and extract them, and sprinkle them with dragon's blood powder, and incense burnt; and put a piece of a plaster soaked in other ointment on the powder, and leave it until it dries, and treat the ointment as necessary.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is as follows: either by needles, as we have mentioned in the belly sewing; or by thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	of lip tumors
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lips of the tumors are hard and resemble grains of wheat, becoming smaller and larger; therefore, it is necessary to cut off the lips, and each time you cut, take them with tweezers and pull out in each part; then use the blade after cutting the vitreol broits, as long as they are not bleeding; and then the blade of the scissors, and cure the blade of dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the horse's knee
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the knee has been burned on the horse's knee, which is called the "albulus"; if you can hold it with your fingers, and the copes its root, and leave the bowels or the sinew; then put in the legs vitriol powder or other restricting and desiccating powders; and when the char returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the copes it twice, and cauterizes: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the estrums for the horse.
des sordens	of the sutures
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No times are assembled at the root of the teeth, teeth between the cheeks and gums, which are unpleasant and sharp; and no times are the black and citrus tooth and forward, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth becomes weak; if it comes that you should place the tooth between your hands, and its roots in your holy, and expose the teeth or gums open, as long as it does nothing; and then I make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as they are turned; and if this is in the first reason, it's good; if not, if it returns to re-enter the second day and tooth, as you have everything turned; and you see that teeth have different forms of wreaths to laugh, according to what the demonstration shows, because the raser, whose teeth are polished in other forms than those shown between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the patient's tooth pain that you wait as long as possible and then eat, because it should not be done; for it is a substance of high value, therefore there is no excuse to neglect it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is forced to eat, if you are certain that the tooth will not hurt.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient's tooth has passed, and make sure that the tooth is clean, and give it to chew the tooth; and if you are certain that the pain will not return as long as the mouth is dry, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones; and when you are sure that the tooth is well cleaned, then scrape the tooth with a spatula hard enough to protect the gums of all parts; then the mouth should have your needles well inserted in the first place and then insert them more deeply, until they are well fixed, then affirm the needles; and make sure that the patient's tooth is in your healthy bone between your teeth, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After cutting the tooth evenly with a wire, and if it does not break, then take none of these springs and pull out the buds from each side lightly, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the teeth are felt and gnawed, then it is necessary to fill them with cloth, whether they are loose or not; and if the tooth is gently twisted with pins, it will not break in the pulling; and it is wise to overturn the girdle to clean the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well aware that you will not break it, and there will remain a part, and the patient suffers from the malice of the root, greater pains in the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	1. And you should not make a wound like the ignorant healers who, with their haste and their hardiness, break the charm never, and do not harm anyone that we have known; but they bring it once by the agony of this great disease, either by the roots that they cut, or by the charm that they break, as often as we want; and when it is raw, wash the limb with wine or vinegar and salt; and if they come out with blood, which often happens, use the limb with vitriol; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the teeth, whether they are at the front or back, are long and wide, and do not double in size when you pull the tooth; these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large bones if they do not break when pulled, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have sharp points to hold onto.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth is dry when pulled, if it comes to pass that you must cut into the gum with a sharp knife, then:
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the root is smoothed, then cut off the points that are called "algorif" (a type of tooth), even if the gums look like a beard; and they should be made in the same way as a lime and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of all these nails, then you must pull the handle as far as the root, and then put the instrument called "athali", which is a pincer, in the form of:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is very large and does not break the bone, and if the root jumps from this, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the tools, and follow these forms that come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help yourself with this instrument that has two rings, then the form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems large nails, then the form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	1. And so it should be that it cannot break, and it should be sharp like the ends of bones; and also other fragments, which are not least; and the surgeons use their own instruments subtly, according to what their hands and the disease demonstrate, because they have some diseases or the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of bones, and it does not break at the wrong place or other bones, or it causes harm, if it seeks out fragments that I have said, and helps with gestures, according to the form.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	2. And let it be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can hold and oster; and then restore the leu of medicines corresponding to this, and if there is any porriture in the bone, and it is small, if all this instrument is used:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears that does not fit with the natural corporeal form, and its shape is unpleasing, and even more so in women, it comes to pass that you must cut off the tooth after the tooth has erupted, and it is not straight, and it cannot be smoothed or filled: therefore, the gum; and if it is erupted with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like the small tooth, and it should be of hard metal, and be sharp and pointed.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cut is quickly and quickly in the hands with the hard tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filled, then you can fill it with a piece of gum like this form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	1. And it comes as if the lime is made like the eagle's claw; and in the lime the tooth is rarely and lightly placed in the hands, so that it does not move until it chisels; then the edge at the end has no roughness, and the tongue bends too much and breaks the language, if it can mold the spicier as much as it can be even, so that it does not break the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	2. When the tooth is placed.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	3. When the tooth is placed by pressure or by blows, and the patient cannot press on it because of the pain, and you cure them with restraining medicines, and it does not work; if they are to be restrained by a golden thread, because the silver threads turn green and rot, but the gold does not stay; and if the thread is too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of spice between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, as long as you see understanding in the healthy tooth on the other part; then continue the covering where you began, and gently and wisely move your hand, so that it does not move at all; and if your finger is at the root of the tooth, so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then the patient should fix the string to the head of the tooth, assemble it, and then place it between the healthy teeth, and put it in so that it does not break the tongue; and then leave it as tight as possible, and if it slips, or the thread comes off, if it is tightened by another thread; if it stays and serves for all its tension, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the second healthy teeth and the second gums, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is loose, if it is reset in its place, tighten it gradually, as we have said; and do not let it stay in place if it is not firm and painful, and never make it like a bone of a mare's tooth, and put it on where it was lost, and tighten it as we have said, and it lasts and serves for all its tension.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	The first sentence to translate is: "de coper lou liein de la lengue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is there a tongue that comes out of the mouth or nature, which is not caused by an accidental wound; or if it is caused by a wound, and the mouth is so deep that it reaches the madman's mouth, and it is made to laugh with its own hand, then it is the nervous one that is most large, as long as the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it is sharp or out, and it is a painful wound, if it pierces the uncinate and the large one immediately follows; and keep in mind that the fever should not be too much, for the artery is out of place; and when you have done this, if the tongue is red and sore, or cold, then put the tongue between two linen sheets; and the madman will be touched every night, that the one who uses it can be soothed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the wound becomes infected, if it is not treated immediately with vitrelle broth; and if it is left untreated, then the cauterization on the slow-healing cautery, which is applied at the base of the wound, must be performed as soon as possible; then the care for another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see the wound to be red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is a gangrene; and if it is inclined towards the blenchor, and it has moisture, if it oozes pus, and the smell of a subtle spumous liquid, and the delivery of a part and another; and if the patient is left untreated in your care, then apply vitrelle broth as soon as possible, until all the wound is dressed; then lift the limb from the wound and the care for other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the chin
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never has a gangrene of the chin appeared that is called "godath," and they are properly called the second mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, then keep guard: if they are abscesses of small sense and flesh color, and not touching much iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, and not touching much iron, then not to touch it for the evacuation of blood; but let it remain as long as it is dead, and then you will take it out, or it will split by itself; and if it is pustular color and the root is subtle, and you have prepared the instrument for covering, but first look to see if the abscesses of the chin are resting and are calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then I make the patient face the sun, and their head is in good condition, and they open their mouth and the tongue is placed between their hands, and they press the entire instrument against the lingua, whatever it may be, whether silver or gold: and it is as fine as some nails.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Do you press the tongue against all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the pincers and the needle in the hare, and draw it as far as you can; and take no other thing with you, then the cop is made of the instrument, whatever may be its form, which seems like some forces; and the whole of it is corbeled, and one part turns into another, and are very crooked, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you lack needles, then the form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be divided on one side and named on the other; and when you cut an eggplant, if you cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision, apply warm, hot water to the patient's face, and make it cool, and if blood comes out, if the hot water is applied, or burns from pomegranate seeds are cooked, or from mustard, and similar things, until the mouth is not sore; then the cure is as long as it is healthy; and never do other abscesses appear in the mouth than the two eggplants, if they are cut as the two eggplants are cut.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with a small abscess in her throat, which was causing difficulty swallowing; she had closed most of the gullet, so the woman could not breathe through the blocked duct, and could neither drink nor eat, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so large that it had required two incisions through the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then removed the entire piece of bone, and took out a large portion of the intestines; I then removed another piece from the other hole, and closed the mouth and pressed on the tongue; after removing the bone from these abscesses and taking out a part, there was only a little pus left; and then she was able to swallow again, and began to drink water and wine, and continued to cut down on this abscess with long strokes; the abscess grew larger and filled the socket that I had made, so that it would not fit in; therefore I removed and cauterized the abscess: afterwards she improved; and I left these parts, and only God could do more for her after me.
de l’uve	The first line of the text is "de l
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the head of the urethra is drawn downwards, and it is long and thin, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and bent, it is called "urethra".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	If it is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the wound is calmed and made small, then it is appropriate to touch it; and the one that is bent and is not long can be assembled; and if it is bloodstained or has a strange color or black, then it is appropriate to avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great risk to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see, according to the method I have described, that the patient's gallbladder and length are considered, that you place the patient facing the sun, and press the lower lip on the instrument we made note of earlier; then clean the eye with the water, and pull it out, and the copper is in the two segments I mentioned in the incision of the two breasts.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not copper more than the superfluity that is over the natural end; for if you cope more, you will grieve the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two breasts, and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of pain, then you must use an engine for the fire cautery of the other pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head on your hand, and then presses his tongue onto the instrument we mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and confines with sharp, live fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and with this use of the instrument's edge, the form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a hair or puts medicine on his cheek, like the cat's tail, and places the instrument in all the medicine on the eye; and the patient is anxious on his side, if the saliva and the mucus flow from his mouth of the medicine given, if it does not descend to the throat and the chin, then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the eye, the half of an hour, as long as you see that the pain and the medicine's bitterness are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and withdraw the instrument from the cotton into the case of the cord, as long as the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five hours, if you have skill in re-cauterizing the medicine, if it resumes, and after the cauterization of the excrement into the eye, wrap it in cotton and put it in a bottle, and clean what is outside of the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision alone; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamine, iodine, oregano, rosemary, chamomile, and any other herbs, and mix them all together or any of them in one pot, and add water, and boil; and it can be well glued with strong earth, and the pot should have the instrument made according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or gold, and one of the ends of the shoulder is put in the patient's mouth as much as the vapor rises through the nose, until the nose is numb; after that it often resumes, until the nose is dry, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the onset of gangrene, because many things come; and do not make this unless the decline of gangrene has begun.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a needle and put some wax on the tip of the needle, if the mouth of the patient has not been too dry; for the wax on the needle does not grease the mouth, and it is good for the overall cure.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened in the throat, either with a bone or a fish spine, or nothing at all; if it comes to that, then you must see what you can, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and if it does not open and is pinned in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance, if it is moved by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and then press it on the sponge, and then glutenize it; and when it reaches the stomach, if it is not, and then draw it back; and if it does not come back from what we have said, then take the instrument of plucking according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	1. And let the strap be placed around the neck if it can more gently enter the mouth, and raise the head; and guard that you do not touch the epigastrium, that all may survive, and do not force the bones; and it is best that the patient and the instrument force the tool, because it is best or the thing is there; if it is forced, or it is drawn further along all the instrument evenly, as far as it can be.
de la sansue de la gorge	2. of the throat's slackness
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	3. No time is medicine useless, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not profit, then look at the mouth of the patient in the sun, then that you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the joint, if it is all small and sharp-edged, or if it has fine points like this one.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If it is not worth anything, if you take a hair, and pull on the patient's throat with the hair, then pull or cut the hair as needed, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's neck is always sweating.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full advantage of the cool sweat on your neck, and open your mouth, and you feel that it is swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and if the joint still feels hot, then it is not worth anything.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If she does not understand as we have said, if the patient smokes tobacco, use the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, as it will cause discomfort.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation if you prefer to use either tobacco or charcoal, and place the cover over a covering in the environment, and in the other part, place the head of the instrument; then perform your fumigation, and the patient places the end of the cord in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not enter, but goes to the throat; and the throat will now hurt, and if it restarts the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient's thirst, and drink salty and acidic things, and do not drink lemon water; and then perform the task that was intended by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it is, when it can be seen, resembles tines like corbels to enter the mouth; it has the appearance of a surgeon's beak, and has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot hold onto it; and thus the form is:
li chapistres des apostemes	The procedures for the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the abscesses are, according to what is remembered in this book, and they vary in puncture and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its own appearance itself, and due to it being moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if by the hands or they are in the course.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because the apostes of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the apostes of the lower limbs are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if an apostem is not properly felt, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if there are such cases where it is necessary to feel when they are believed, and they do not die according to their completion, like those of joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when apostes come from dead joints, and they are left as long as they are porous, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For the incision, if it is of the principal member, and you delay the piercing as long as possible before it becomes mortal, it will harm the principal member; or it is of the foundation, if the hole is not made quickly before it becomes mortal, it will harm the foundation. And only that the incision believes to have completed digestion, rather than the one that is of the foundation, it will not cause mortality, and it will be long-lasting and form a fistula; and it cannot heal in a great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you clean the wound of the incision of the member that is mortal according to the completion, and when the pain is calmed, when the fever subsides, when the pain and the bruising are eased, and the debate and the ague of the wound of the incision, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you sew the wound or more dependent on the member of the incision, and where it has been opened; and it should be the wound long and of great length, and if the wound is in the hands or feet, or in joints and in the nerves and arteries, and in all of them equal or without soreness.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that prick, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the body, if it is confirmed that you leave the puncture until it is completed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick before it, if it is long in coming from him, and it pains the belly; and by chance they harden the lips and become flattened from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is known by the wide belly, according to which member it belongs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you cut out small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many fangs according to the appearance of the abscess; and if in such abscesses or they have to be cut off the head, and closed; when it becomes as hard as I am, and is dried, then it must be done as with bubbles: and if in such cases that are cut at three angles, and if in such that are closed like the fang of a snake, as with abscesses of the gout; and if in such that are made with a small cut, and others with different sizes and appearances closed.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	1. Those who have no chief, if the grief is superficial like a wound, it is necessary that you cut it finely; and when the grief is large, and has caused great pain, and you cut it, if you do not stain all the wound with your tool in that hour, but only part of it, then the grief will soon heal to the other side, then you will not touch anything proper; do this many times, as long as the wound is completely healed; at the same time, if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carries, or small children, or old men with decayed limbs.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectorants have never been seen with the end of the bowel, which is sometimes lost, and you will not find it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have discovered your abscess, if the wound is large, look at the size of the abscess; and if it is a small one, use a linen or cotton bandage; and if it is large, and there are many pustules, then wrap each in a separate bandage so that one may cover the other; and if you have cut into leather a part of the wound, and you have healed it, then fill it with fine cloth or ragging from linen or wool, and sew it to the edge of the wound; then the bone, and the care of the ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the blood comes out of the vein when you open it, if it is cold and wet, and thin, and many drops come out, and you put the leu in the dislocation many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood comes out of the vein when you open it, if it is cold and wet, and thin, and many drops come out, and you put the leu in the dislocation many times. And if the wound is deep and painful, and the pustules that I mentioned in my hands are in this book, and if you have dressings and ointments to relieve the pain, and you apply them to the wound and the pustules, and if the wound is charnus, and the pustules are wet or oily, or in wine and oil, just as we said, then close the wound and the pustules and the dressings, as necessary, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this comes when you completely understand the treatment of abscesses: or if you have asked how to go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of blood
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the chief comes to treat abscesses, and they are done in the same way as the gallbladder, like the surgeon's knife, and it is made in different ways.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It can be thick and hard or moist like poultry; and if it is hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt that the knife will not do otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the description of the size if you are able to see with all the instruments called "enterotome", because the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they are made longer than necessary.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is seen, it should not be left with any hair that contains the moisture, because it will return if left alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian linen soap; if present, use African soap and linen; and leave the wound; and whatever is cut should be treated.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the wound, as you can see, will not stop hurting; then treat the wound with ointment according to what is convenient, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	When the patient holds their breath, if the pulse follows this form, it is too long; and the bones of the shoulder girdle are exposed, the skin is burned from all sides, and all care is focused on drawing out the arrow or spear; and if the artery is contraction, I will do as I have said after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if the aposteme is severe, I will cut and clean it as I have described.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	The wound is made around the severe aposteme and is cleaned because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	If there is no moisture in any of these apostemes or wounds, and they are not from an old woman's needle; and I found the aposteme as a sharp, rough, and bloody pierce, which could not be broken; and if none was made, it would have been as a sharp wound.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other cases of the same type or kind, it is better that those who come for the children and the roots of the ears be opened as soon as possible, even if it depends on the most dependent part of the ear; and they are treated according to what is necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofuly
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often times there are abscesses at the collarbone, and they are opened, and the plates are removed, and the wounds are cleaned, and never have I seen any other part or part that is not sore, and they are sewn together with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each case of scrofuly is properly located on the side, as we have said, and the appearances of these scrofuly are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	1. It has needles that contain moisture, and if they are from malicious ones who will not obey nature.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	1. In the one that you see in good position at the hem, and resembles the color of the healthy skin, and is silent from every part and not too deep as nerves of the heart or artery, and is not very sharp; if it comes that you cut it with a razor, and burns in every part, and are the lips of the knee as the nails, if you have skill, as we have said in aphorisms of the chief; and it will be short and few, and you will be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and will not be too sharp, that the hands do not slip, and do not see too soon, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you prick the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitriolet powder on the wound, or any other dust that remains salty, and stretch the wound; and leave it until the poultice is saturated, and soothes the wound, and begins to slough.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And if the wound is not saturated, then return to your vein as soon as you can; then wait for your physician's mark to see if it shows any small scabs, whether they are coming or going.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if the scab is at the root of the wound, then only prick that scab with a double-strong thread, but do not remove it; then apply the wound with soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, then assemble the two lips of the wound, and hold it now, before there is any excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and draw it out, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those wounds that are swollen, pierce them if they are not closed; and pierce them as in the one mentioned earlier, depending on the size, then apply ointments and similar things until the corruption is cured; and when the wound is healed, if the cure of the ointment is successful, as much as it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the glabella
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and talked about the measurement of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our time who does this, and this is the writing of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squinance, it is necessary that the incision of the throat, which is called 'epiglottis', be avoided; and this cannot be helped by it, because all the veins and the pormon of the maimed are in those who have had the mouth chopped off, or in the throat or in the lips.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cut off the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, then, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it in three or four circular cuts, each about a quarter of an inch wide, passing through the two circles, and not too deep into the cartilage; and they are easily sectioned from the epigastrium without causing any damage, and the edges are long enough to suture.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	If the master is unable to do it, then it extends the jaw bone all the way to the chin, then cuts through the muscle as far as it goes to the chin; and avoid the arteries of the neck, if you see nothing, and then cut through the fascia, as we have said; and is demonstrated by the section of the raw flesh from the chin that springs from the bone that is broken, and from the lack of voice; and leaves the wound overstretched a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed since the injury, gather the two lips of the wound as much as possible, and press on the entire surface of the cartilage; then administer medicines that make the wound healthy, as soon as it is clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not know how to do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is in danger of death, and there is a shortage of thread.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, one should act on the epigastrium because the patient cannot breathe, and they respire through the wound, and it is kept alive; and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound over until the malady had passed, and it had passed in three days or four; and therefore, they commanded to suture the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured. And I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden is bleeding, and she has cut her throat, and part of her hair is missing; and I was called to cure her, and I found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and I find the blood that issued from it, and although she did not have much vein or lead to the gorge, the wound was caused by the blood.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried to the wound, and I treated it as soon as she was healed; and she did not return to the maiden until she was silent of voice, and returned after her disposition; therefore, I say that in the cutting of the epigastrium there is no great pain.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large jaw
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernias are called "hernia of the jaw," and are large hernias of a yellowish color, and are more common in women; and they occur in two ways: natural and accidental; or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs in two ways: one is similar to large muscles, and the other is similar to hernia that comes from the artery; and if it is painful, and does not overcome the force that is small, and the test and search for all the introitus: if you trueve as I am fat, and cannot in any way, if the cope, so as to cut all its cloth, if it has none; and carefully finish it, and cure as much as possible, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	The first sentence to translate is
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of us, which I will describe all the appearances; and it is necessary that I tell the difference between birth and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is childbed fever and ague, as long as the fevers have passed and are accompanied by the purge; therefore, the fever and the ague rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the newborn there is no fever or ague, and contains the sweat, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the forehead, and becomes like a vesicle, and grows; and they are according to two appearances, either rough or moist, and the color is as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you examine and first inquire into all the instruments called "entromising," according as their form comes or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of the body is that you press or more wetly on the part where the abscess is, and turn your two hands and hands often until you feel that the thrust has entered the cavity, then that is according to the size of the abscess; then draw out the entromising instrument, and hold it steady in the direction of the thrust.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	1. If moisture occurs, the color it has will be like this, as I have said for other abscesses; and if no inflammation comes after the entrenchment, if it is fat, then it is done in a cross shape, and it is taken with pincers, and the skin is lightly burned at each point and the wound is washed with water; and if you do not wash it clean, then it is done in pieces so that nothing comes out.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	1. If nothing comes out, then it returns to us many times; and if it consumes a pouch, and it does not hurt you, then employ the wound with some corrosive poultices, and draw the wound, and put on calming ointments for the abscess, and cure other abscesses as much as it is possible; and if it becomes large, then close the lips of the wound, and cure the one who caused the injury.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	1. And if the vein resists or is otherwise inappropriate, and you hurry and use the glasswort leu, let it remain for II to III days, as long as the wound burns, and rest the ebullience of blood; then return to the copper that it is due.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	1. Look at the forms of the protruding stumps, and they are of three kinds: large, long, and small; and there are three types of "albarets" (those that are large), "brebs" (those that are medium), and "petits" (those that are small); and they are also like the beaks of birds, and are made of gold, silver, or copper; and they are valued according to their color, with yellow ones being more valuable than black ones for encircling the corners of fistulas; and there are three types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the larvae of the abscesses.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the claws are of different appearances, as you see: large, medium, and small; and if in claws that have II corneas of III kinds; and if in claws that have III corneas, and are III kinds; and if in claws that have II corneas, and claws without a cornea, and are III kinds; and all these are necessary for their legs.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these are sharp, and such as cannot cut but one part, which burns the skin, because they do not touch the vein or nerve; and these introducers are the nails turned into forceps, so that the surgeon does not lose them in the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are used only in the legs, jaws, arms, hands, fingers, and toes, and never on another instrument, seeming like the points of lancets, according to this form, but if it is necessary to make a sacrifice of lancets, it is done.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and he puts it on no time at all to the shoulder that is strong in enduring pain and wounds, and no arteries, and never returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	The breasts of other men swell when they attempt to correct their dislocation, as if they were female; and they become thin and bloated, and those who see them cure them, if they follow this form of this line:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then the fat scorches, and uses the wound with medicine charged with fire, then assembles the two lips of the wound in stitching, and cures as long as it is healthy; and if the breasts swell again, and are made smaller by their greatness, as if they were women, if they are held together at the end of each, so that the smallest line contains the larger according to this form, this line .b. until line .g.; then scorches the leather that is between the two lips, and removes the fat, and does what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not all made, because the patient does not rest, or because of the discharge of blood, if you fill the wound with soft cotton soaked in corrosive ointment, and leaves it until it absorbs the remaining fat and grease, then cures as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first line translates to: "Of abscesses of the hooves.
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The second line translates to: "These abscesses that come from the hooves are forms of hard scabs or warts, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	The third line translates to: "Therefore, they must be treated according to this form, along the line .b. until the line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fourth line translates to: "And when the entire bow is in the abscess, if used is the wound of fine cotton, and it is left until the other day, then all the cotton is removed, and it is treated with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the abscess resembles scabs, then it is like we said in our words of scabs, and if the wound is deep, then use cauterization as we have advised before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the blood flows out, if it happens repeatedly with abscesses, and also the vein is lost and abscesses; and if one knows that this is from the artery, then it is its abscess that is long; and when you feel it in your hands, if it feels tight; and when it is from the vein, if it is recoils apart; and it is madness to cut off this abscess, and at the same time when it is dried out and angered and open and other parts of them are hurt, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The translation of the first line is: "It is necessary therefore to avoid the use of fire, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is enfleured with arteries made from the skin of long limbs; then make a cut as you would with scissors, and withdraw the artery through the holes until it is discovered; then take an awl and perforate the other side, and draw the artery tightly around the two ends, according to what I have shown in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then release the leg that is between the two tines of an introducer as much as it does not move, and so remove the gouge; then apply the cure that you can make with it, as long as the wound is healing; and if the gouge is for the vein, then when it is sane, take a piece of the gouge in your hand that you have from the gouge all over the leg, then remove the awl from the leg that you hold in your hand, and perforate it, and if it has two fillets, then draw the other one; then close the gouge, as I have said, or one of the two parts of the two fillets; and if you doubt that the fillets will not come out, then take another awl for all the gouge at the incision of the first awl, and tighten the fillets in four holes; then close the gouge as much as the superfluity does not come out, then close the superfluity of the skin and leave what is likened; then make a bandage with thin thread in wine and oil, then apply cures for tentings and ointments as much as it is sane.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As for the arteries and veins, when they become inflamed, they come with the nerves when they are too tight or from too much work, and similar things happen.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	1. And it happens more often with helpers and you must do it in all joints, and that is the cause of pain, and its color resembles the color of a wounded heart, and it is in many positions with pain; and when it is stretched, if it is felt by the hand, and it is not much like a strong heart, but rather like a weak one; and it is silent in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, nor does it contract, and the one who is in joints cannot overcome it with force: by chance it has contraction; and he who is at the elbow or forehead, makes the skin sweat.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the graft is small, and it is held with nails, and the root is in its place; and if it is large, and it spends in the bone, and burns it, then the bone and assembles the wound to the stitch, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large necks hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never have I seen it in the belly and does not cause any other part to hurt, and it is a disease called "funge" by its appearance of wounds, and it has a subtle root, and a large head; and in it there are many small and large wounds; and I have seen one who had such a belly that it was more like funges than anything else, and it had no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and they were infected, and became moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and discovered in one there were eighteen ounces, and in the other six. The wounds are cut if you look at whether the edges of the gauze are moist, and the color of the fabric is bluish-green and moist with a subtle root; if the cautery is large, and they are in your presence, then it is a fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting, there are often too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not attend to it, then you must cauterize; and if you see the gauze swell and become red from the incision, then take a piece of well-baked dough, and encircle the fabric as we have said, and leave it there; then secure it, and continue to draw out the dough film as much as possible until it covers the fabric, and work on it with your hands; and if the roots are large, then press them against the belly, but not too hard, then cauterize so that it does not revascularize; then cure the wound, and keep the tailor's hole which is of a foxy color and poor sense and lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted ulcers, and I will come to treat this ulcer here after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the patient is in pain or distress
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the sore comes from cauterization or cutting with a razor, and it is in the belly and has some blood, if it is like this in other ways, or a wound that is cut from veins or arteries according to what is before, or a fistula; and if it is due to the rupture of the sore and the issue of the blood, then the color of the ulcer resembles the color of the corset, and it is light and causes pain at various points.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more complex, and when pressed on both sides, it returns, and by chance it may be stretched, and the opening to the bath becomes larger and requires great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand; it does not constrain you; and if it is due to sac, it opens widely with these signs: large and hard apostemes, and is folded according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to vasodilatation, it is anxious at the wrist, and the appearance changes when you look at whether it is from the sac of the artery, vein, or vasodilatation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary to leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or the bowels, then it is necessary that the surgeon cuts the hair around the wound, and extends it all over, then sews it tightly around the body; then he commands a string or a cord of strong silk to be tightened around the wound, and the wound is closed firmly; then the half of the abscess is stretched on the string or the cord, and the surgeon makes sure that the intestine is not injured; if the intestine is caught on the string or the cord, and it is pulled out, and the intestine is cut at the bottom of the belly; if the abscess is caught in the bowels, and it is held by the anus, and the excess is removed; if the artery or the vein is contrary, or the wound, then turn to your work and take two hooks, and two threads of silk, and sew two threads on what you have done as if you are doing it; then stretch the abscess on the two hooks, and if you see, then the hooks, and leave the wound as it is until it bursts, and the dead part dies by itself; or if it oozes subtly and bursts, then do the cure for what it comes to, and close the abscess as we have said; and remove the sand or the moisture that you take, then cure the wound of what it covers, and soothe the wound.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the appearances of a gumma, and it is commented that one must oversee by medicines, and it is commented that iron must be shot; and we say that gumma is caused in the marriage, and great caution in its cure, and they tell the old man that when gums are in the body or can be removed if there are as many gums as chancres which are in the mammillae, and in the fissures, and in the like places, and it must be all done when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, if not able to approach it, for I have never seen a cured one; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the operation, when it is in the body or can be opened, is that you never purge the patient with black charcoal; then make it healthier if there is manifest fullness, then cut the bone in the leg to make the operation; then your shoulder bones or chin become green, and all the hair falls out, and the bone of all parts feels nothing left; leave the wound completely drained, and press well on the limb with your hand or on anything, and let the dislocation correct itself if it deviates from the incision of the artery or vein, as long as cauterization is not done; then another cure until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "de ydropisie
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is "de ydropisie". In the division of symptoms, we have discussed the appearances of dropsy, and how the assembly of the pulse is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is only; and should one touch iron in these two appearances: this means, tympanites and hydrops, since this is a mortal thing; therefore, when you medicate the dropsy appearance called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you look at whether the maladies are weak, or if there is another disease than dropsy, if all and solution of the stomach and such things; if it does not touch iron, because it has doubt; and if you see that the patient is very green, and only has dropsy, and it is not too little nor too much, then you should over: gently hold the patient with your hands, and press the belly to the lowest part of the pit, then take the spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so, let us proceed to Section II.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And so, let us proceed to Section II. If the point is not entering but only reaching the intestine when it is removed, and it cannot be cut, then look at whether the discharge is directed towards the intestines: if it is, then you must cut from the left side of the boude III; and if it is due to disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the right side of the boude III; and if it is due to mucus, then it should be on the left, and not just the mucus but also the excess that runs to the weak part of the belly; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and the boute, and lighten your hand on all the surrounding area between the skin and the syfac as you would when scooping out a quantity of dough or soil; then perforate the syfac as soon as the surrounding area begins to come together at the left six, and that is the end of the abscess, then remove the instrument from this side, and if it is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver needle, and is light or feather-light, and in the part of the socket there is a small puncture; and sometimes it costs three punctures, and twice others, and once more, and it is the head cut so as to resemble a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head of the wound, if you see that when it bleeds, now take the instrument away; empty the first part or the third, for if you see more than there should be in that hour, by chance it may be the end of the man's life due to the resolution of his spirit towards the weapon, or he may die from weakness, or he may be near death; but according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of his virtue signify, and his wounds; then take away the instrument and hold the wound, and it will be held now by the part that is swollen around the puncture which I have spoken of, so that you may see how to do it; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the man suffering as he does, and take a small quantity of astringent; do this every day, and keep from bleeding as much as possible but only a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	When you doubt the patient's condition and let them drink water, if the care for the grave or sand bath is needed, and by washing or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes flushed; and the care of drying medicines as soon as they are healthy, and cauterizing on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the fever, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the growth
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without having had a fever, or if the fever is small, or it is not in their chest.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the patient does not see anything at all, even the most subtle things according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the catheter subtly and tie it with the string, and leave it for 3 to 4 days or more until the patient sees urine being made, if it is closed, let the urine pass and then replace it. And by chance, no one will close it, because the urine that comes out does not leave closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the catheter is small, if it is medicated with a plug of cloth as we have said, if it stretches.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the catheter in their groin are bleeced, because no one is born with a catheter at the tip of the vagina, for if they pee before it does not lose its vagina up; and they cannot enjoin because of this, because the material cannot come just to the marriage, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the manner of the cauterization is that if the patient gushes blood on his back, it is the head of the thorn and its tail is as large as a pen's point, if it pierces the flesh; and you must prevent the loss of blood that often occurs, and if it does, if the wound is infected, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	1. of thorn's pustules
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Many times, pus comes out of the thorn in the back, and it has an unpleasant appearance; and among them are malignant and non-malignant; if you prescribe them to the subcutaneous tissue, and cut and remove all of them, then put on cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then the treatment of the ointment is done as long as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the tumor is malignant, of a dark color and sizeable, then you must perform a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	After removing the tumor, if it is still growing, and has both hairy and bald parts, then you must remove the remaining bald part; and if it continues to grow, then the cure for the bald part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you remove the entire tumor at once, and do not leave any part of it, and it becomes black and corrupted in its place and outside; then all that is black and corrupted must be treated with honey and flour made from the scraps of grape vines and wheat, then the cure of other cures as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out of the wound, then follow this form of the moon cautery:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if blood comes out of the wound, then follow this form of the moon cautery: it is knowledge, at the discharge of sanguine and corruption; and if the head of the thorn is corrupted and retracts, then you must cut or lead a rope around the thorn and piss out the salve among; and when the hair arrives at the end of the thorn which has not been circumcised, or has come by wound or abscess, then it comes to pass that you scrape it with the instrument knife, as long as the roots are loose and free from the thorn; and if this is a difficult matter to do, then you must scrape it with the spatula of any part of the thorn and the hair; then pour some element between them, and put a subtle fold of wet linen on the cold edge, so it does not return.
de la circoncision	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not more difficult than other wounds; however, if we make this work of our own will, and properly as for our children, it is the best work and the most gentle for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not commonly circumcise their children, for they do not use it in their law, and have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of masters and doctors who made circumcision in the old way, and with force, and at all ages; if it were possible to kill them, for it has two threads, and by chance if one of them is cut, and the other remains, then that one is dead.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they return, and the pain is double, and at circumcision which is done quickly, there is no assurance of the point of the member; and at the circumcision of the ring by chance it breaks the iron, and wounds the skin, and many times are born without any means of circumcision, and I want that.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mondification that is made with forces on all the strand of the thread, I have found its benefit in the experiment, for the forces cut equally as well as from above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if it cuts evenly all the way through; but that the thread be well twisted around the bow; and that the first stitch be of the right kind, as if the child could understand that you only tie the thread around the bow, and then tighten it in all the ways you can think of; then tie it straight between your hands, and put the forces between your hands or on your fingers which the child cannot see, and then blow your hand on the bow and lift it as high as the tip of the bow is assembled, then mend well the dung that is in it, then tie the leash with a double thread, then tie the other line; and hold it tightly between the second knot and the index finger, and twist the loop around the thumb and the index finger, then loosen the knot gently and take out the tip of the bow; then leave the sand pouch and pouch, for they are the most difficult; and put some powder on it and on the powdered glue made from a piece of cooked beef cut into small pieces, cured with olive oil, and fresh, and leave it suspended over another day, and the cure will continue as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the wounding is this: the two heads are thin and sharp, and are as strong as the arm.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of wounding if it occurs when the edges come out of the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it to your nail, unless the edge becomes septic; and it should be done correctly, and if you do not hold it with your nail, then the wound.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three years, and the wound is infected, if you let it be as long as the septic matter is quieted, and gently burned, and if the wound is not infected, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Cure the limb with substances that have powdered plague, which we have mentioned or treated as powders, and if it does not work, then it will become worse; cure the limb as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	2. Hold back the urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	3. If the urine is bloody, or if there is gangrene of the wound, or of the bowels, or of the intestines, or of similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra, which is at the top or bottom of the bladder, then it is necessary to place the vessel on the back, and extend the abdomen from the part near the back, and restrict the male member as much as possible; and then it is necessary to constrict the bladder at the expression of the urethra, because if the urine is discharged, and it is not, if as we have said, and the male member feels great pain, then it is necessary to perform an extraction with all instruments that are called "siringue", of which the form is: and it should be a thin silver hair, like the tail of an owl; and it should be the tooth of a palm tree half an inch long, and it should be thin at the root.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	1. And the manner of the urine's exit if you take a double thread and tie it around the waist of linen or cotton, and cut the waist of the thread at the umbilicus; and cut off the excess of the linen and cut the umbilicus, then anoint the umbilicus with oil or broom and ointment of urine and urine of ox, and make the patient sit on the seat, and the patient empties the bladder and the verge with moist oil and olive oil and French thyme; then gently place the thread in the verge as it reaches the root of the verge, then double the verge towards the bowel; then cut the thread before the bladder, and feel the patient come before the empty bladder, and this is done according to this order because either the patient or the bowel will be turned; then the thread goes through all the linen pouches and the urine follows the linen, then it is withdrawn further, and the urine is made up; and the siringue resumes when the bladder is empty and the bowel is healed.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there is scorching or burning in the bladder, or when an abscess forms, and you see water and medicines distilling, then do this to all the instrument called "clyster," and it is shaped like:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there are three pulses: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the water is drawn up by means of such medicine as makes the patient sweat well, if it is possible to draw off the moisture, and then close the outlet; and when you see your medicine running in the bladder, put the end of a cork in the moisture, and pour into the funnel which is therein; if you pour the moisture into the funnel, and then force it back strongly into the funnel, if the moisture enters, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the clyster subtle by which the bladder is cleaned: if it is this.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	1. It is either of silver or archaut, and the head is higher up; and from the eye or the lips; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisturizer on it that you see thickening the bladder, then place it between the two eyes to form a double-layered pouch, and heat the moisturizer with the fire; then cut the chief of the moisturizer at the edge, then hold your hand steady on the bladder all the way through the moisturizer, as if the patient feels that the moisturizer has reached the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and perforate it roundly around; then pull out the thick thread from these punctures, then assemble the circle as you would an instrument, and put in what you see as oil, moisturizer, and wound dressing, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand as much as the moisturizer goes to the bladder.
de la piere	from the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in division the ways of incision and extraction of arrows; and we said the difference between the incision as rain and other signs, and in which piere one must cover by size; and in the vessel, and in the verge; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision which is more frequent in the vessel is in children, and it is a sign that the child's fever has risen from the vessel, resembling a rise in its subtlety; and it opens easily, and cuts the child's throat, and it can many times, and then becomes stronger; and then the child's fever returns; and it is light the cure of children up to four years old, and it is heavy in the elderly, and it is more grief in those who are between the young and the old; and it is the cure lighter for those who have large incisions, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we arrive at the treatment, if we cover the patient first with a cloth, we must clean all the feces that are inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never swells up the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs, and stand up and move downwards until the wound descends to the anus, and does not rise once above the waist; then place it between your hands, with your hands on the abdomen and thighs, if the anus is completely deflected below; then you can cut and touch the wound; if you feel the wound in the area, now you can trim it at the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If the patient does not feel any pain when touched, if your index finger is wet with oil from the left hand, or if it is dry, if the hole is completed; and the needle enters the socket, and pulls out the suture, and when you feel it in your finger, if the thread is at the top of the vagina; then press on your finger, and pull out the needle or where you see it entering.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press on the vagina with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand's fingers at the top, and his left hand to hold the thread that is loose at the top of the fingers; then he pulls out the spatula by squeezing, because this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	The text describes the process of reducing a shoulder dislocation. It mentions that the shoulder is between the collarbone and the socket, but not at the costal margin of the opposite side; the head of the shoulder should be above the socket, and the angle should be large enough to fit through the opening, but not too large; in case the head of the shoulder gets stuck, it should be pressed gently until it gives way; if there are any rough edges or angles, they should be smoothed out; if there is any subluxation, it should be reduced gently and carefully.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	1. If the wound has angles and margins, make it larger; and if it does not fall, then you must tighten with your nails which are like a thumbscrew on the head, to hold the hole so that it does not slip; or you may use a fine instrument curved at the head; and if you do not engage it in the wound, then enlarge the pore if it is infected, and if it is not corroded, then use vitriol to tighten; and if there are more than one hole, then first tighten the largest one at the root of the urethra, then close it, then pull it out, and the small ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is left large, it will become more painful and cause a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things may happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out through the urethra because the urethra cannot be stopped; but you must try to draw it out, or cut it off with needles, as long as you draw it out in pieces; and when you have completed your work, use the plague of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and draw it, and then put on the wound ointment and wine, or wine and pink rose oil and cold water, to soothe the fever blister; then sew up the patient at the neck, and do not leave any thread hanging out.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if the joint is well lubricated with oil and vinegar, then apply the ointment of finicky and basilic ointment until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if blood comes from the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood are found in the urethra, and this is due to retention of urine, which is done in a certain way without causing pain with the urine: cut the tip of the wound, and extract the blood clot, as if it remains, it will cause the urethra to narrow and rupture; then cleanse the wound with oil and vinegar and linen, and apply all remedies in every way you know, so that it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the urines you treat, that you lie on your sides, and assemble all the medicines below the knee.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the prick is small and it is led by the groove, and it is not directed, and the urine cannot be discharged; if the cure I have prescribed does not relieve this problem, then you must cut it several times for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already given this advice once.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I recommend that you follow this method and cut it at a 30-degree angle in one slice.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the saw and hold it along the groove so that the prick does not enter the uterus; then cut the wood on the side of the groove until it reaches the prick; and turn the saw in your hand at the prick as much as you can feel the prick on the other side; if urine comes out, press your hand on the part that is being cut by the groove.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is so badly broken that it breaks with urine, and the gall of the patient; and if you do not know how to do this for nothing, then cut off the head of the wound and the other side, then make a hole in the place where the wound is between the two hairs, then extract it, and remove the hair, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat the patient as soon as they are healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of a woman's piercing
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There comes when a piercing is done in women, and if there is no time, then the cure is grievous and defended by three things: one is that by chance the woman is virgin; and the second is that it is not possible to find a well-behaved woman who descends as much as she should, even when she is young.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the dislocation is severe, so that it moves great distances from the entrance of the vagina to the root of the thigh; then, cover the wound at the root of the thigh with a piece of cloth moistened with cool water, and do not move the head of the limb away from the wound, and feel the pain in that area; and do not move the other limb above or below the wound, and make the size as small as possible, then bind the limb with a bandage, if you feel pain as intense as the wound, and cut several strips of cloth: it is to know, both small and large, sharp and rounded, long and curved, and those that have wounds.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you suspect the appearance to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If you suspect the appearance to know the outcome, then if the eye is not affected, put vitrol in the eye and hold it for an hour until the eye is not sore; then return to your work, as long as the wound is healed, and have bandages as I told you in the extraction of the wound to help you in your work; and if the eye is not affected, and it is a blocked artery, then put powder on the eye and dry it with cloths and benzoin, and do not continue this, and leave the wound and do not touch it, by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the pain of the wound subsides, and you read it, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is healing.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Hernia cancer is simply a collection of moisture or white sphincter, which contains the testicle; and it is called "sphincter" and has never been properly in the testicle's clothing, if one cares that it is another testicle; and this is the leather between the white sphincter that we have said; and there has never been any.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is due to inflammation that comes from the testicles, and it is expanded by that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	1. And never once does it come from percussion on the bones, and this moisture is of various colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or clear white, and this happens more; and these are signs of this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is reopened, and it does not open the bones, for it has moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	1. And if it has moisture within its own cloth, then the abscess is reopened with a part of the gum, and therefore it is thought to be other ointment; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sac, then it feels well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, you should try everything that enters the wound.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introit, judge whether it is dependent or not.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we come to cut, if it is possible that the patient is not injured according to what we can do and the fullness of his chest; then the surgeon should sit on his back, holding a thing high, and remove some cloth from his side; then he should sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the gouge between the two ribs of the costal cartilage; then take the scissors, and cut the costal cartilage between the two ribs as far as the point of the shoulder, and make it straight and white according to what is possible; then pierce the white part of the sharp edge at the large puncture, and remove all the sharp parts, and then put your thumbs, and set the sharp edge away from the costal cartilage, but do not touch the costal cartilage, only the sharp edge itself; cut all or in pieces if you can, that is if you do not cut well, if the sharp edge returns to your hand; and if the patient's leg suddenly moves when you have completed the work with the sharp edge, then assemble the two ribs of the costal cartilage at a seam, and treat it as other wounds, as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you suspect the testicle is infected with another disease, then listen to the pulses of the veins, doubting the dislocation of blood; then tie off all the veins, and remove the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is assembled into two parts, like the branches; then tie off the other part as you did the first incision, then take out the sutures, and put oiled linen in the wound; and put another layer of soft linen in wine and oil, and put on the stitches, and doubled drapes, and tie it to all the parts according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two threads, and use fine wool according to this appearance and they should be assembled by stitching in the groove of the undergarment, and some of them are pricked at the foundation on the back, and others at the part where the point is; and one other thread is used at the two ends, and it should be completely assembled in the loop of the braies; and no time is ever needed for this cauterization of the sharp edge of iron, and it is that you prick the subtle cauterization cultellaire, and cut the leather of the horse's hooves, and it should be washed if we have said, if that the white that contains the ink is discovered; if you take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce the ink on the teeth, and burn it at this subtle cauterization chaut.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	The patient should attempt it in all ways possible; keep the instrument from touching the urethra; be careful that this operation is done safely; and avoid dislocation of the joints, and avoid making the wound too large; and if nothing else makes you do otherwise, such as an abscess or dislocation of the joint, cure what makes you do otherwise, according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is too weak and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horrible nature, if he insists on perforation, as I have said, and if you are sure of the meanings we have stated that the mouth is the place for it, then fix the mouth on the upper part of the wound; then pierce the abscess in the widest part of the wound, and make the perforation as long as necessary; and make sure the wound is large enough so that all the pus comes out; then put cotton on the mouth, and tie it, and let the pus drain from the wound until the wound is healed; and if the dressing comes off and allows the pus to enter the wound's mouth, then use a needle or instrument that is used to treat the pus of the hydropes, and form it as it is in front; and enlarge the wound, and make sure the pus returns, and reassemble after six months or more, and when it is assembled, it will be like before, and then pass the mouth through its jaws.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the nails
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Caution: In the section of this ramie, there are many difficulties, so I think it is better to leave it; I will now describe the ovary and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that all abscesses come from wounds, and also from nails; it is by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know that the abscess is caused by superfluous sweet and acrid matter, which is spread on the nails, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the wound; and it does not cause pain, and it is an abscess of grief, and sometimes it is grayish-blue and purple, and of fuscous color, and never comes from an artery or a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is of an artery, if it is located by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press on it with your two hands; and only then will you be able to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is made of gut is located by the arrangement of the vein, and can be well made in this shape and in others, and it is that you cut off the crotch, then the wound is at the top, and the blood is white and clear, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the urethra is already stopped with these wounds, then it must be that you draw the urethra and cut; and if it is full of serum, or in this case where the veins are obstructed, then it must be that you deliver all of this, and the cut recoils.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the child is from the lower part of the body, and you manage to catch it all, and remove the head, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If your wounds are completed, then use the smooth woolen plaster in oil and rosewater, and then continue with other treatments as needed to become healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a remedy for boils enveloped in a wrap similar to a bandage, with the softening of the boils, and the patient should be still quiet when it happens; the treatment of this disease is well done as far as we know, and all we can tell you about the wound, according to what was done in the past.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you shave the patient's leg below the knee, then cut the bandage according to your two hands, all the threads that are close to the edge, and tie the knots; then apply a sponge large enough to cover all the veins, as much as possible, and then scrape over each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries in the temples; then take a needle or if it has a double thread, tie it at the first place where the blood came out, and tie it to the other end; then cut it according to the length of the wound, following the longest course, and in the veins that are corrupted; then cure the wound as we do with other wounds, if no vein is bleeding, and if all the veins come out, then tie the knots at all the veins; if the patient loses his grip due to the incision of the veins, and the threads are cut and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the facial bone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	When the rupture of the facial bone occurs, it is either by section or extension, or the intestines descend to one of the groins; and this fracture is either due to facial trauma or extension, and these methods of injury come from various causes: either percussion, jumping, biting, or tightening the grief face, and in similar ways; and the signs when it is an extension of the facial bone are that there is little and little, in long tension, and does not suddenly come; and it is the abscess equal to the parfent until the front, because the facial trauma presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is of the section of the small intestine, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and it appears in different places, not near the skin, and this is from the intestine and the heart due to the inflammation of the small intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never has the circles descended with the intestine, and it is held in check, and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, it cannot be escaped.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the treatment of iron for pain, if it cannot be avoided, is as follows: If the intestine is cut, and it can be held in check, and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed; then open the wound with your hand, and cleanse it with warm water; then sew the edges of the wound with threads according to what you have used to open the wound, so that the suture does not come out; then scarify the inflamed part of the small intestine, as far as the white clay is visible on both sides; then close the wound with your left hand, and hold the blanc syfac above your right hand; and stretch the uterus towards the tail; and command the midwife to extend the uterus, and remove any intestine or white clay that is entangled behind it; then take a needle or a thick thread made of four filaments, and sew it in the rear part of the inflamed part, which is after the small intestine; then assemble the threads one on top of the other in a cross shape, and around the blanc syfac, as we have said, which is behind the small intestine, with a strong thread of two parts; then enclose the threads of the clyster, and form them into a knot of two parts, so that no vessels that are cut can enter the uterus, and the string does not break; and leave the first knot according to the second knot, and after these two knots let the blanc syfac which is behind the small intestine be as wide as the uterus carries it; then close the wound with the remaining threads, and sew them in the part that is behind the small intestine, as far as the white clay does not stick to the string, and the bow, as we have said before; then apply olive oil, and put on plaices, and sew the string that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	For no time is this cauterized the white soap that we have said, after incision, due to fear of evacuation of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the linen as it is; and if it lingers at the wound, then it should be washed with hot water, and what we have said should be applied until it heals perfectly; then cure the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia of the flesh
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this chapter, I have never seen anyone who has made a cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made in the same way as the vis which is assembled with the veins, in a similar manner to tying the arteries, after we lightly cut them at the end; then cover it, and cure the abscess of that which operates, until the veins cease; and the cure as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No dislocation ever occurs in the muscles, as we have said, and it is opened; and no bowels come out of the intestines, and if they do, it is nothing, and all hours are repaired; and if it stays too long in this position, it is believed that the wound or syphilis has occurred when the intestines come out; which happens due to the extension of the abdomen as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and compressed the limbs and opened; and the cure is always by cauterization, as we have said before; and no cure is ever done in this way: and it is that the patient groans on his back between your hands, then cover the wound with a bandage according to its size depending on the amount of III doses; and then remove the plaster that was applied when the wound was closed, then take the gauze and put it on the limb appearing with the third plaster; and press on the two abdomens, then cut the two limbs appearing with the third plaster according to the patient's stomach and neither syphilis nor anything else; and remove the stomach, and do not cover syphilis or extend the bowel or any other thing, as we have told you in the cure of the wounds of the intestines; then the cure is through the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the threads, if the wound is cleansed and cured as soon as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The incision is difficult to see, and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauterization is more dangerous in this place, and further away from the salve.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the horse's hooves.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the horse's hooves is softened in no time, because the shoes that are made are softened, and it can be seen; and it is the work of the surgeon, when one sees that he is curing, to take hold of the knife on his back, and cut the leather that is softened on the natural leather; then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, do the first excess of softened leather at three stitches or four firmly; then cut between the stitches, and cure it as well as the others wounds, until it is healthy, and chief the thread.
dou chastrement	The translation of the first sentence is: "For
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The translation of the first sentence is: "For in our law, chastisements are forbidden, and I thought it would be better to not mention them in this book; and there are several ways to do this: one is to have the patient respond when asked about the chastisement and its cure, and the other is because we often help other animals such as goats and sheep, and mutton, and hedgehogs, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	The translation of the first sentence is: "Therefore, I say that chastisements are carried out in these ways: either by attrition or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one we are doing by attraction, let our seat be in hot water as long as it is softened and while; then press with your hand, as soon as they are put back and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The treatment of circumcision: it is necessary that you shave the best, and press the leather of the scrotum with your left hand, then tighten the suspensor, and tie each knot at each testicle as you well burn them; and leave no small sweat or subtle sweat that is on the veins; and this manner of treatment is more severe than the one made by attraction, because in attraction nothing happens to the scrotum, because the best desires luxury; then cure the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	The text provided does not contain the phrase "des hermofrod
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermofrodie is, according to two forms in men: one if it is that between the two lips it is open as the nature of a woman, or if it has hair, and never in cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other form is in women, and they have it as a virgin and the lips.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of the stomach and belly is that you cut all the loose hair, and cure them as other wounds; in the second form, men whose urine falls through the lips, without care.
de la tentigene	Of the temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tenting is a tool used on the natural part, as it is too unsightly to see; and no woman has it as great as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you trim the superfluity of the temptation on your hand or fingers, and lightly lift it; and do not cut too much, as it may cause pain, then apply another cure until it heals; and another tool that is in the mouth of the married woman, and the emplace, and by chance it jumps, and it resembles a knot, and for this it was called the ancient "knot disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you manage to open it, if as we have said, and cure it as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	1. If the nature of the woman is not clear, or the child is premature; and it is due to nature at birth, or an accident caused by illness that has come; or it is due to improper use, or excessive strain or pressure, and is made in the marriage bed, or on the couch, or in bed, or wherever else; and the conception and confinement, and by chance the flow occurs; and the knowledge of this is due to the remembrance of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	1. If the dislocations appear to be getting worse, whether it is for your own good or for the sake of another.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the pain is subtle and occurs in the limbs, if you hurry, it will not come back: put your two fingers together, and have the woman lie down on her back, spread her legs; then the limbs form, as long as the subtle pain persists, and the tightness remains; then take lanolin and apply it to the limb, and put the woman on her side each time you sleep, so that it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is hard and persistent, then it may be necessary to apply a poultice of mustard-like substance resembling flour to the affected area.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient is cold-natured, if the pressure on the gallbladder and stomach; and let the remedies be salty, as salt, dragon's blood, incense, a large amount of urine; then make a poultice of hot ointment, so that the wound does not become infected; and let it remain for a long time, and make a tent of dry linen; then cure other remedies as long as they are healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	2. And when the marriage comes, if the couple wants to follow this way, do not be afraid of enchantment.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	3. For in the marriage where enchantment is present, one should not touch with fear.
des emorroides	The text translates to: "Due to the dislocation
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes are wounds that without proper care become infected, and when they become infected, they become thelul; and we have said in the division of appearances and signs, and I will say those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that wounds and infected wounds, when they are made in the flesh, do not appear until treatment is given by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the patient can be felt, and they can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, it is necessary that the woman be placed in a cold house, then the gut is opened with needles, and the copper is applied to its roots, then powdered medicines restricting sweat, such as those of ice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour water on her feet for an hour, then place it in cold water; and if the sweat comes out, if I do it in a decoction of sumac and the juice of grapes and pomegranates and galls and similar things, and then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and gall, and apply it to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is inflamed, it is bad.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make the patient lie on their back and put their hands in a painful position; then take, and the milk in juice of plantain or in juice of agrimony with vinegar, and apply to the head.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is closed, if the wound is cured as soon as it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the sharp point of a knife, as I have said before; and then the wound is cured as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of abscesses of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come in the arm, such as syphilis and piercing abscesses and herpes and fistulas and blisters and phimosis and piercing abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, in this treatment, it is necessary to deal with the chancroid that comes in the arm, which is not a wound but a bubo; and if you see the cause of the abscess, look at whether the abscess is red and hot at the beginning of its appearance, and if it becomes red, then you should see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	For the first sentence: "Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;" translates to "Do not force the patient to endure pain, but make them do it as long as the pain is eased; then place the patient on the bed, and have them sit with their knees bent, supporting their back and assembling their limbs as they can manage; let their thighs be expanded, and put their ankles at their knees, and tie them well with a girdle; then proceed to the instrument that is placed in the mouth of the married woman, and after that comes the form; it is necessary that when you see the instrument being applied to the mouth of the married woman, you first know the correspondence of the mouth of the married woman, so that what enters through the instrument does not exceed what it should, and does not cause the patient to bleed; and if they are larger, it is necessary to cover the correspondence of the mouth of the married woman with cloths, so that the patient is not grieved; and it is necessary that the instrument's handle be placed at the desus, and that the instrument be shaped.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess opens and it is cleaned with wet hands, if it penetrates the head, apply oiled cloths to the wound; when the bowel is seen, it is necessary to put in the wound soft tentacles of oil rose or green sec; then place the tent further down the marriage, and place it higher on the marriage and the cut nail clean moistened with vinegar or mustard if they are cooked; then the cure after two days of treatment coming to this, as long as it is healthy; and never lift the marriage and the wound by claws of vinegar and honey, and then of vinegar or roots of lilies and aristolochum are cooked; then repeat the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is dressed in the materal, then it comes that you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Midwifery is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman press against the bed, and desire to smell the scent of the am; therefore, hasten the children to issue; then you should know that these children are according to the natural figure, and are from your chief, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, it comes to gently press on his belly if he will bring them forth quickly; for when he descends from his head, if he comes with the second, and is monied by the materal's superfluities through good cleanliness, and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes to its bones, and it comes to the heart or head, and the hands, or it comes to one's stomach or side, and it is converted by chance in one's collar, and by other harmful figures; if it is skilled and subtle in these things, and avoids error and deception, and I will show you all the figures of what one must help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born naturally, and the woman gives birth with great effort, and her virtues are weak, then if she is put on a pillow or the women hold her, and if the nature of the oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then the baby's movements between its two small spatulums are observed.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	1. "Then, cut the second part, and hold it against the nail as much as possible until the moisture that is being removed is enough; and press the belly of the woman as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to close the woman's muscles with ointment of fenugreek; then apply and suture it, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if now the child is born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	2. "And if the hands come out too early, then it is necessary to gently pinch them a little at a time; and if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the seat, and hold the feet high; then lower the seat onto the ground, and mark on the woman where she stands unsteadily; and if the hands cannot be inserted, and the child dies, then it is necessary to cut the hands at the corner that is before us, and take out the child, and reset them gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the child's foot
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes to his feet, if it is possible to put on a shoe; and then the shoe is quickly fastened as much as possible; then pull up the toes and stretch them out a little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump like a cat, if commanded to, and I make it jump by commanding; if it jumps, let God see.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if the shoe is quickly fastened as much as possible, until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	If it does not come out as we have described, say if you need strong muscles, oil of sinew, and melted gum, and brimstone all in mortar; and according to the nature of the woman's wound, then apply this remedy until it is healed; then lay it on a hot stone until it is cool enough to touch; when it is moistened, apply a cloth soaked in wine, and leave it for an hour; then lay it on a bed, then stretch and draw the mouth and nose, and press gently on the belly because the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the issue of the child with its bones
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if it holds its hands close together; then put it on its side, and hang the feet down, and wrap it in a cloth; and fold its hands close together, and then press its hands on its belly, and press the knees together as much as possible, until the belly is flat; and if the child does not jump, then hold its feet and make its legs bend, then bend its belly towards the head, and pull its hands towards it; and when the child is flat, and command the woman to wrap herself as tightly as possible around the child.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	The engineer must bring the hand: if it cannot be brought, then lift the woman and go; if she cannot go, then make her sit on the bed and bend the legs; then stretch the muscles that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the seat and study to bring the hand back; and when the child is born in its natural position, make it straighter, and command that it pains as much as the child can.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	The issue of the child at its neck, and its hands expanded, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	1. It is necessary that the patient's hand prints on it, then twists it slightly and lightly; when it is equal, if it is applied with the natural oily nature of musk and oil, as we have said, then it is commanded to move slightly and lightly; when this is done, if it is placed on the seat, and it is commanded to preen; and the seat is smoothed.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. In the same manner for all subsequent fingers.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	3. When it comes to applying this manner to all subsequent fingers, if the second finger is caught in your nail, as long as the moisture is present; and if the child can be placed on his face and neck, so that the bowel does not slip out, then pinch off the bowel, as soon as you have done it, and command the woman to preen no time: therefore, it should be light.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is said that twins are born many times, but never at once; and this is a strange thing, and not often seen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and do not live long; I know that they are multiplied, and are born by the faculty which designates them, which is like a bouquet; and they never issue naturally as all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born gently, if the cure is as we have said, and is the subtle dance, and done quickly and lightly what it does; and done in such a way that it is worth saying hello.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are all formed as a child by the measurement of a certain gilded age, and cover that the saucy dance all things, because by chance something like that happens; if you follow what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to cut with hands; if it happens that the woman is healthy in her nature, and has no accident or death; if it happens that the woman is inclined to her back, and her shoulders are downward, and her legs upright; and the midwife gives the teign of II parts, or she is lying in bed if she is not treated for the descent of the child; then anoint the mouth of the mother with oily oils with mustard seed and fenugreek and linseed with oil; then anoint the hands of the mother with these oils and mustard seeds; then blow lightly in the mouth, then take I leu or the bones that are adjustable to this, and take care that the child is apparillated when it descends from its head; if you place the bones in her ears or on her cheek or in her mouth or in her beard or in her chin or on the hair or near the clavicle or near the costals, and the child is born with its head down, then the bone is placed in her left hand, and puts the crook between the two fingers of her right hand, and blows lightly to the bone with all hands, and places the bone in none of these places that we have said, as long as it returns to the empty thing; and this is the shape of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then look for the other bone, or the one you are most familiar with, if the extraction is equal; and then the dislocation is adjusted by moving from both sides, to ensure that the bones fit together properly, as shown in the figure.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part breaks off, if there are any of its two bones missing, cut them out in that part, and bring the other part together; and if it does not break off, then put this bone or higher up on the limb, and do so until it is all in place.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by traction, then wrap it around as shown in the figure, until it is all in place; then cover the wound at the ankle joint or knee, and then you must do the same with the other hand, and put the foot in its place.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	When the head of the child is large and it is misshapen at birth, or if there is a sudden assembly of the fontanelle, it is necessary to insert the spatula between your two thumbs and split the fontanelle and remove the cerebrospinal fluid; or you will do it with the instrument called "almidach", if the formation comes with the forceps or chaper after this; and then make the child's head naturally large; and then pull out the bones with the tines, and the child's head jumps and is pulled to the force, as much as the moisture that is or has come out; and if it cannot issue, if it blocks at the mouth that you push; and if it is enlarged at the abdomen or depressed in the costal cartilages, it comes when the moisture corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its mother's breast, if it draws gently, and the milk flows to the child's mouth.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the child is in the belly or the thigh, if it covers that you draw it out at an angle with your hand; and then if the belly or thigh is wet, and the other limbs are swollen, and the head is drawn to the mother's breast, and the mouth is held against the nipple, and it sucks; then it sucks the breast, and the child is quieted; and if the mouth of the mother is contracted from the gums that it came from, and it does not make any trouble, then it is necessary to manage things that are moist and heavy; and the management is made with warm saliva and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	When the child is in its costume, and it is placed evenly, if you do not disturb what we have said in the living child; and if there is no way, then it will be through pieces, and nothing of the second one will remain.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	When you have done this, if the child is disturbed what we have said about the posts coming in the marriage; and if the wounds come out, then it should be put in a cooling restraining manner, and other cures will be disturbed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I see a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another and found that the others had also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came some abscesses in the body, and inflamed much when seen, and began to make great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I made use of strong soothing ointment, and after a while some ounces, and then more and more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised much, because the belly has no ounces.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought that it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted the wound, and with my hands I took out ounces as much as the woman was better; and the woman saw the long wound in her, and it was a little part of her bowel; and I do not remember this chapter because when the master did an strange thing, I thought I should help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the shoulder back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, where we hold the books; and when it turns with the heads.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Throughout, the corners should be more subtle and restrictive, and made of flat or round wood; and the mouth should be no wider than a thumb, and the margins of the branches should be long and narrow, and at least half a palm and a quarter of a palm; and these two jaws should be firmly held in place, with one end fixed and the other free, or a quarter of a palm more; and these two jaws are inserted into the mouth of the shoulder to open when turning the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	1. Another form, in its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of flat or square wood, according to the appearance of the nails; and it has two edges, as you see, like a palm of the hand, and they are wide; and when you open the mare, as you see with all the instruments, if you place the woman on the bed, the thighs and legs spread out, then adjust the two edges and the nails in the mare, and hold the instrument's handle firmly between your fingers; then operate all the instruments, as you have done with the nails evenly, according to the quantity you see open the mare's mouth, until the bride faces what she sees.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	1. This instrument is all around, and its appearances are multiplied; when one sees them, the more they work, the higher they rise in quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	2. If you do not despise the instrument that you have not seen, because its needs are not easily overcome.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	3. When the second child is born, if you command the midwife to hold the placenta, and then carefully remove it from the body, and force your hands to the mouth and nose; and if it jumps because of this, so be it.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	4. If the child does not jump, and if I can, and perform an episiotomy or perineotomy, and place herbs that may open the mother's mouth, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, and cassia, all of which are cooked or pounded with water on fire; then place a cork or plug in the mother's mouth, and the other end in her mouth, and tighten it as much as the vapor leaves the mother's mouth; then remove it, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second leap fails.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment, and it does not improve, then command the patient to take their left hand in oil of sesamum or musk, and then apply it to the wound, and then remove it; when she finds it, she should gently stretch it out a little on both sides, so that the wound does not slip during extraction. But she must then move lightly to the right and left, and then draw it out. If she comes and it heals.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is too tight, we have called for the treatment of stretching and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not do all that we have said, then keep from pulling on it; but it is likely that what is in the mouth of the wound, you will tie it to the woman's thigh, then apply ointment of tetrafarmaçon; if it pierces and returns, and comes out stronger, but all the same, if it pierces so much that it has a bad smell in the stomach and head, and makes the patient sick.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it comes that there are successful fumigations in this way: no of the ancients have tried fumigation of cresson and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is such that it fumigates the woman with the retention of flowers and the secondine if this is:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a dog, and one puts the subtle head in nature, and the wide shoulders under the fire; and it is the fumigations with charcoal, and the ash as much as it is gray, and another one begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to see if the foundation is good.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not perceive the foundation well, but if they have some subtle face: if it comes to the task of perceiving that face in its own way, and not perceiving anything from spatulum agut, and grasp the handling that it does not touch; then put on a fine powder in wine and oil, and the cure of ointment as much as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not stay in place, if you put or puncture a needle into it, and let it go, and be careful when the child sees it going to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this help without great pain or hemorrhage; if it happens, if you can mend it: if we have said about the needle in the skin.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula formed.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the side of the wound are nodular, and grow, if they come from the edges of the wound, or in the space between them; and when this nodularity is old, it becomes hard and swells, and sometimes becomes blue or purple, and never are these fistulas permanent; they are known by the fact that they are due to vomiting or diarrhea when the patient vomits, and sometimes happen by chance.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that pierce the uterus and a large part of the vagina; and they reach the joint of the coccyx and the neck of the anus.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	If you cannot find the fistula at its base, and it is not tortuous: then use your index finger or a thin needle to enter the fistula as far as possible, until you reach the anus.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If there is tortuosity, then use a small tent or horsehair to enter the fistula as far as possible, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no emesis, no straining, or no discharge, then follow what we have said: cut it if it does not pass; if you need to cure it quickly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the bladder or led from the urethra, if it leaks and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived at the junction of the thigh, if it leads to the knee; if it has tortuosity and excessive pain, if it causes constipation and no medicine can stop it; and in these fistulas there is no cure other than labor and vanity of the lazy who enter into them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not a true fistula and not an ancient one, with hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient's hand is on his back; and he leans his legs until they are against his thighs, and his thighs are inclined to his belly; then make a tent of blankets, or of plunk if it has tortuosity, as long as you are careful or the test comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	When the patient feels pain at the base, if it is detected that you have reached the end of your index finger, it feels as if it is trying to perceive; and if you discover or feel between your thumb and index finger, the nail or the claw, then you should check if it is intact; if it cannot be mended and cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is difficult to heal all wounds, but this is not the case; and if you can, then do this: if the cautery is made according to the size of the fistula as mentioned earlier, then insert the bougie completely into the fistula until it reaches the base; and leave it there for 2 or 3 days, until you feel that these charred parts are hard, which resemble a quill like an ostrich feather; then the dressing of softened char and soaked char.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is in good health, then it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is not in good health, then it cannot be healthy; and if it tries to enter, and does not pierce the skin at the bottom where it should be, and between your thumb and index finger put a thick covering of char or smoke, and you will see the fistula at this point that shows the covering through; if the cope starts at the beginning of the fistula, and ends before the tent, and then cauterize after, as it goes to the end of the tent; and it will be released from the tent, and will hurt; then the charred parts that seem like a needle of a swallow will be broken, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire cauterization or medicinal heat.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauterization has two effects: it knows the surgery of these joints, and the stopping of blood and the relief of swelling; then the care of wounds softened in the belly or in the thigh, as long as they do not hurt, and it is left in place; then care for the wound of sour sores enchaned with dry char, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return often.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes suddenly with great force, and it is moved away from the body, if the vessel is damaged or not, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tendon, and enter II is the fabric or the scar, or it is close to perforating, if not it was only a sign of marriage and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways: or you cauterize as we have said, or you cope justly in front, or if you see that it has many tents and cures as desired; and do not move too much in front, that you do not cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and vie for the excretions through the desired sense; then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it is healthy, or you remove that covering and the mundue then when it is coped with the fundament, or by tent or another instrument appointed; then mend the char made in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part behind the foundation: if it is still a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time have fistulas been made in this manner: and when you reach the end of the fistula, it is either flat or has a doughy consistency like the skin above it, if you take a tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you cut it in two, and cut the tent all along the fistula as far as it reaches the head:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perpendicular to the doughy part of the skin, cut the thread along the fistula as far as it reaches the head; then remove the tail of the thread, and assemble the two ends, and stretch them apart, and leave one or two; and keep them together until the threads meet again, and curl around each other; then treat the wound as much as it is sore and healing.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, if you try to open it in all possible ways that you can think of, it will not be too difficult.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to make a cut through the lacing if it is possible, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the sharp-spined thorn from which the fistula was made is, as we have said, a spike and a trench; and on the other hand, not, because it is not possible to cut through it without it breaking, as you can see in this:
des emorroydes	of embalmed bodies.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	1. Dislocations are classified into two ways: either they are due to the foundation, like resin grains, and they have small and large ones, and some are cut off, and they have one or more, and they weaken the foundation and the head of the foundation; but those that are weakened have little moisture, and they are cut off or a small piece of turquoise or a small piece of sinew, and they have the color of the core; and the treatment of those who have weakened the foundation is that you order the patient to spit out in chambers as much as the foundations become, and when the foundations are firm, and the offspring appear; if you hurry, and you can catch them with tweezers, or you hold them in your nails, then you cut them at their roots; and if they cannot be held by their moisture, then they are laid flat, or on a cloth, or a piece of linen; and they are taken out of your two hands, then they are cut, and you powder some hot powders that are in the cauterization lewer; or you cauterize them as it is said in the cauterization chapter, so that other cures can cure them as long as they are healthy; and if they cannot issue, then they are clisterized with clister mouth and sharp teeth, and you wash what is under the foundation, so that it can issue openly; and if the patient's mouth is not preened, and the filaments are weak in the foundation, then it is the lightest cure; and if you preen them with your nails or tweezers, and they are cut off, then they are cured as we have said, so that they are healthy and do not fear the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to your attention that you need to adjust the stitching according to this method: take one thread, thread it through an awl, and then pull the thread on the other side, and turn the two ends of the other thread around the awl, and if it is too wide; and then tighten the thread, then knot the thread, and draw out the awl, and do the same for the rest, and leave the excess suture at the top of the suture; then put the foundation fabric on the wavy edge with oil rosette or cerulean, and put the foundation, and command the patient to lie down; and then leave it as long as it does not change, and when it will change, if the cure for ointment and other cures, then it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The first sentence to translate is "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement". The translation of this line is
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	For many times there have been sediments in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to passing a spatula or your nail at the spot of an abscess or the scar of the wound, which does not allow moisture; then treat it as much as possible, and if it does not heal, then repeat the incision as soon as it is safe, and soak it in hot water and dry it; then treat it as much as possible.
dou fremit	The first line of the text translates
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Antonin is a small insect that should be present in the chest, and it moves around; and never does the patient feel it, and it is felt to be like death's tremor, and it comes throughout the chest, and more in the hands than in any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	If the cure is that you take a thorn from a sheep's hoof, or a vulture's beak, and place it on the tremor, as long as the purple circle encircles the tremor entirely; then turn your hand over all the thorn until you cover all around the tremor, and place it in front, and draw out the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if I make this of a bone or iron in this form, and it is subtle and thin and through:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	If you do not see, if it does not move, and if it is in front or in the chapter of cauterization:
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cyste:
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never has it been made of silver or archaut, or melted iron; and never has it been made of these small and large gashes, according to those that are used:
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, they are made in the care of children and the weak and painful, are small:
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small, large clister is such that it is placed wide, or the belly is made according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if it has a depression or the belly is depressed, as you see, and the head is perceived; and it is at one of the costals, and at the other; and the belly or places the medicines in a vessel of a beast or parchment, and perceives all the holes from small pertus, and between each pertus there must be a spice, then through each pertus thread the strong thread is passed, then assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is given, if the loop has the instrument before a strong thread, then clisterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of urine or something similar, then lightly apply the ointment; then the surgeon takes his two hands and assembles them as much as possible, until it is all done, then he removes the bandage, and gently raises the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night, it will be more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if you dislocate the hip due to disease of the abdomen, and the medicine comes out, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the swelling is or the abscess, or the phlegm, even if it is as subtle as that of a child; and this is the form of the subtle abscess when the skin is stretched.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division of wound treatment; and you will say the treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the parts where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things made by wounds are made of the point of the piercing, and the size of the lancet or the lance, or the needle, or the spear, or other things; or according to the parts of the body, as a wound that is made at the neck, or at the shoulder, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will mention simple wounds on the shoulder, as the memory will come to your chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or head, and the bone is not broken, if it is from cutting or similar things, and the skull is completely torn and the large wound is, you doubt slightly of hemorrhage: if it becomes safer of the head itself, if it comes little blood of the wound, and it is healthier on the opposite part of the belly; and avoid the excess of wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not become safer, if the meat is anemic, and does not drink wine, and does not eat fat; and puts on the wound, if it clots comes, thin oil or olive oil only, or in vinegar steeped; and if it does not clot, if it puts on the wound, it is fresh at all its sanc, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say a little later; and if it has been moved, if it puts on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a spearhead and its appearance, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be assembled by stitching, just like I will say for belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is discovered to be of bone, it may be, and only holds by a point, if the cloth; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hardness in the leather of the thigh, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you cut or scarify the flesh, and it does not reach the bone, if the wound is large, then cure it; and if arteries have been cut in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, if one wants to stop it, and you delay the wound, if the edge of a thread; and if it does not benefit, if the cauterized.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	If these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you apply this powder which is always dry when the doctor has touched it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is: take a part of incense; saffron two parts; live chalz three parts, and the fine powder, and apply it to the wound, and pull it tight, until it sticks well and adheres to all its sanc; then the powder is well, and it is left to drip if it does not enfle, for one does not want to use the medicine more than it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never once made is it done solely with heat, when there is no candle or blood of the dragon, but that the wound has been touched by the art.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the art has touched the wound, immediately in this way; but use some digested ointments, or dough made from flour of barley and honey, until it blooms; then apply other cures as necessary until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if it is extracted with fine tweezers; and I will tell you more about this later in the chapter.
de la plaie dou col	From the wound of the knee
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is simple, it does not differ from the other knee, but if it is a deep knee wound or the artery is compressed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a deep knee wound, if there is no other choice but to leave the treatment, and nothing else should restrict it, because it will heal and pull back; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the more delicate member; but if medicine is available, like cool water rinsed with oil rose, and the wound washed in the same way with cool water, and other piercings according to this method, and moistened bandages.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, and it is bound with bandages, then the cure will be done once it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and full of bones, and it is pricked or lower down the leg; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows from the wound, and the cauterization is done as best as possible; and if the spine of the neck or the throat is pricked, or the jaw, and it is held, by which the meat goes, if the bone is cut at the corner of the neck, and it is replaced according to its natural figure; then the extraction is done, and a few jaws are left, and the care of discharges is done as much as possible when it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if you want; and if there are pieces of bones, if they are taken out as soon as possible, and those that you do not want to take out, if you leave them as much as the wound is bleeding, and it is healed and allied to the issue; and if the wound is fresh, and powder is put on as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is an abscess in the wound and it has formed a fistula, as I have described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of the arrow or the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from an arrow or spear, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound's vitality: if it is mortal, then the wound is dead; but if it is not deep, and it is fresh all around its base, then do not put anything in the first hour, but give it powder and keep the wound clean, and revive the patient; but if you have ointment, then put a piece of cotton in the wound for suction to remove moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four hours, or more, until the spasms, trembling, and contractions of the chest are gone; and when you see the bones in good order, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	1. Cure the wounds with suitable remedies and other treatments as much as possible; and if it cannot be cured, apply poultices made from herbs that have been boiled, and continue the treatment until it heals.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	1. If the wound is cut with a razor or scalpel, and it is simple, either on the surface or on the back, if the care of the one who is in front; if it is large, it is sanded; if it is small, it is powdered, and if it penetrates into the bone and into pieces, if the wound allows, and if they are removed when they come out; if they do not come out, let it be left exposed to air, if it is trimmed; and for other wounds, the judgments of other parts are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	2. With great difficulty of the stomach
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	1. The abdominal dislocations are large and many, and there is no intestinal rupture once or twice; the sutures are more painful, and no small wound can compare to the large ones, so the intestines are reinserted more times, unless they are reinserted in pieces; because the intestines swell so much that they feel pain, if they return more times, and because the other wounds are more painful, because the abdominal sutures are more common than those of other parts, and the other sutures are also common in other wounds; all of them are more painful with the abdominal suture, and I will say one by one and declare each.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no damage to the intestines, and it is easy to set, this is one of the two ways: either by the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is twisted due to the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is twisted, handle it in this way: soften a sponge or a piece of cloth only, or you can use hot water and cut and scrape, and gently pull the intestine as much as it is twisted; and never do this without causing damage, and it will become untwisted.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the flame departing, if the intestine is hot or cold and swollen, it is because the entrance of a little thing is causing this; and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with the instrument and cut through the tissues; and the first cure is to cut off the part that does not need to be cut, without causing great harm, and this is the cause for fever: if it cuts through the tendons but does not heal, and then it forms.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	When the wound is enlarged and the intestine jumps out, if you put it back in accordance with its natural form in its own place, if you can, because this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdomen, if you can make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdomen, then he should raise his chest and thighs higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound in the one side will be higher than the other; and you must manage this in large and dirty wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdomen, if you can make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdomen, then he should raise his chest and thighs higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound in the one side will be higher than the other; and you must manage this in large and dirty wounds.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I opened the intestine and it had been there for 24 hours, and it was a wound that was 15 years old, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mirror showed that it would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat it with any medicine, because there was none in our league, nor any medicines; and I washed more than twice a day on the wound, and the gauze of honey as soon as it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and thread it through the edge of the wound; when it has perceived the right direction in the right place, if you have the end of the suture or thread that you have threaded the needle with, and make it perceive from another part of the denuded part; and the stitches are understood if you do as the barber does the hair, and leave once the wax on one side, and take it back again on the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen calls his own, is the one that most people use, where they naturally bring together the two ends and apply one of the needles to the other, in this way: take an awl or a needle point close by, and pierce it into the material; then leave the two needles; then turn the awl, and pierce it into the part that is closest to the edge of the material, as the needles are; then pierce the other part of the edge of the material with the other needles that are on the opposite side; and this is the most common way of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	When the patient hears this advice and no one else confirms it, we must cut the belly with the feathers, or as many as necessary; and we must insert one feather on one side and the other on the other, in the manner of those who are twisting; and if the rupture is near the belly, then the wound is more painful than others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is if it is like the judgment of other wounds: and if you touch the fresh wound with all its blood, then if it has not moved, it must reinsert the intestine and close the hole; then put some powdered charcoal on it, and if it has not moved, then put any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bowed; and cut the fillet, and be sure of the suture, and the mirror; then treat the wound as you would with other wounds, until it is sound; and if you have no medicines, then put them, as much as they come out to grip the belly, a cloth full of vinegar, and shake it twice the morning until it is sound.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not have other knowledge in other conditions than wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not cause commonality to the members, then it comes that you lighten slightly in oil of temperate chalor, or oil rose, and put on the gauze, and dress the wound; and if there is pain or fever in the belly, and many times come, if the clysterize with red wine, and at the same time the fever comes to the intestine; and the percute, and soothe that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The small intestine, also known as the "young" intestine, cannot heal while it is inflamed, and this is due to the sensitiveness of its walls and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the gallstone jumps out of the wound, and it is reset as quickly as possible while it is fresh; and if it becomes black and turns gray, then you must note the black leu that was there, because it has lost its blood and arteries; then treat what is between the ligaments, and pull the heads away from the part of the wound up to where the gallstone is coming out, and the wound is bowed.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, if it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were healed or stomach wounds from a lance; and it was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and became an abscess and fistula, and in it was the ejection and vomiting; I treated according to what I could, and did not stop subtleting until it was healed, and I called it.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it was sutured, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly; but he had none, but he delayed in better conditions, and drank and ate; and they said to any experimenters that when a small wound is in the intestine, one must stitch it in this way: first stretch the testicles as much as possible, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the mouth has overstretched the lips, put it between the lips if it can be held; then close the testicle, and it will stay if it cannot slip, then make another stretch in the same way that before, as long as the wound is completely covered; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	1. If the tip of the intestine is hot and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is woven from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the tip of this thread of intestine that is free of impurities, then tie it to the tip of this thread and the thin linen thread, then thrust the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and then pull the thread tight; and this manner of stitching is not harsh than according to the way of the vein and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, it should be done with great care.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula", and at the same time if they are smooth and round.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the belief of nodulation, which is hard and full of pus, and one feels pain, and is as smooth as the tail of an owl; and never in a clear jump, and sometimes thick; never small, and sometimes large; never shallow, and sometimes deep; and I have seen this in the division of wounds, that all wounds which are not healed, and there is no pain, it is only due to one of the seven causes: it is to know, by a little pain or corrosive substance; or by malice; or because the pus is too hard, and comes out through the lips, which does not leave any pain; or there are too many bowels; or the lesion is porous, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because the property in the region is delayed digestion, and delayed health, and runs by nature; or there are ulcers or bones: and I have shown all these causes and their signs and remedies with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The text translates to: "And it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment for fistulas, which is made by human hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	The text translates to: "Fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, or intestines, or the bladder, or any of the costal bones, or the spine, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to affect the principal member, it is similar to these.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	The text translates to: "Fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, or intestines, or the bladder, or any of the costal bones, or the spine, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to affect the principal member, it is similar to these. All fistulas of this kind are of a grievous nature, and only labor and ignorance can cure them; and if there is no fistula that does not come from the place I have mentioned, and you are in search of the cure, then take a needle of iron or steel, and if the fistula is straight, follow it as far as you can; and if the fistula is crooked, then seek for it with a fine needle, for the points will be crooked; and if the fistula is in the hands and you do not find it well enough to search for it with needles, then consider that it is infected or wounded, and ask the patient what he feels when you press his hand with your own, and whether it is a bone, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the parts I have mentioned; and if you find it according to what I have said, and the fistula is not far from the joint, or the nerve, or the artery, or the vein, or any of the parts I have mentioned, then the cure will be effective and the charred parts that are crooked will be straightened; and then the cure, once it is complete and the fistula is well healed and straight, put moilied tents in the medicine ague, and let the patient hold the ends of the tents at the mouth of the fistula, while the medicine corrodes the superfluous matter that has been accumulating; and then put ointments in clean vessels, as I have done; and if it is not complete by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cauterize again.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	1. If the limb does not ache or become swollen or the principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered, and it becomes corrupted and black, until the corruption is completely rotten, then the treatment of strange things is done as soon as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and the bowels are weak, as before, ask yourself if you are able to do this: if it is discovered and wishes to be as soon as you are at the root, and all the corruption is removed, then restore the bone; and if it becomes healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	2. If the corruption is too deep, that you cannot overcome; if there is no other means than cold and bitter herbs; and if it is a small bone corrupted, and you pull it out with nails, if the instrument is flexible for this, and if there are many bones, do not leave any; and if the moisture makes it opposite, and it does not cause pain or fear, then cope and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	1. If you do not operate immediately, if you place the wound something like porridge, and leave it until the pus is drained from the bones, and then the bones will become lighter; and if they are large bones such as thigh or knee, if you only treat the corruption until the blackness has spread throughout the entire bone, then restore the wound; and if a great part of the bone becomes corrupt and turns into bone disease, and it comes out in pieces, if it covers all the corruption, and then cure as much as possible; and I will tell you about a fistula that came to your leg, so that you can use it as an example and help in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	1. It happened to a young man of thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from an unknown cause that came from the chest, until materials came to the leg, and he was expelled by a large abscess, but he did not have a reason to open; but the women overwhelmed so much that the abscess overflowed, and it became a fistula, and then there was a discharge of blood from all the parts of the body and the chest was full of moisture; and they treated him for two years, and he had no knowledge in the art of hands, as I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were given to cure it, and what was corrupted by the discharges of great chest; and it became red in the chest of the young man, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some went into another part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then began to treat the wound with medicinal poultices for a long time, and could not stop the corruption; I found that the bone was also affected, and I had to remove it entirely; I then sewed up the wound with sutures as long as I could, but I could only do so much because I could only reach part of the bone; I then removed the bone and sewed up the skin, but I could not stop the pain; I then treated the wound with poultices for a long time, and it eventually became healthy and did not want to restart the operation due to the patient's suffering and fear of death that I had caused.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because of the frequent bloodletting, but it was cured completely, and there was a hard sign on the bone, and it was in good position and had no harm or opposite effect at all, nor did it come out.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the arm, then it should be set in this way: take the limbs, and draw the upper one to the opening of the bone; and command that it does not extend above; and take another linen thread larger than the first, and tie it at the top of the bone, and place the char on the side of the bone, and pull the char through the wound, and cut off the char when you see it through the wound so that it does not bend the char; and put a bandage or a table on the bone to cover the corrupted char; and set as many times as can be seen and felt, and corruption may still be set.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	When the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a part or in the entire body, if you can cut through the skin; then take some tweezers, and then separate one part from another part of the corruption, and make sure the severed part is as long as the corruption and its opening; if the corruption is in the joint, if the corrupted joint is separated from the healthy joint, and if it contains bone or cartilage on the other side; if the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, if there is no other tissue than dough around it; if the corruption is on the palm of your hand or on your fingertip, if it is very painful at that place, but it is necessary to examine the corrosion as it opens; and you can cut it in any way you like, but the bone or the tendon will not hurt you; and you should know that the incision and the stitches for these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the joints, and their grossness and subtlety, and their growth and shrinkage, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to adapt each appearance of the instrument to your hand; and you should know that the work will show you the instrument you have used, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you can use the instrument you have learned according to what it should be.
dou feu	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou" which means "If".
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	The first sentence to translate is "Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main" which means "And if it comes to the hand".
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. If the joint becomes dislocated due to cauterization, or if you apply any restraining powders, then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed. Then tie the injured limb with a firm ligature, and treat it until it is healthy. And I will tell you what happened to me in my young days: I had a black spot that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in my left hand, consuming all of it; when he saw the corrosion, if he managed to cover the hand, and it became healthy; then later, after he returned with another corrosion or from his other hand, it came to me, and I treated it with certain things after my circumcision, and could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want to lose hope of curing the matter; and I doubted that if I were to cut off my hand, it would not die, because the strength of his hand was weak; and he despairingly returned to his home, and covered his hand with something, and it became healthy; and I did not know that for this other part, if one has the means, one can do it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes when the abscess is formed in the leg, and it lasts as long as there is a great gathering of boils; then it pops and perforates, and with a jump the boils are broken, and the pain is so great that it is like a lance; and the skin that is covered is as delicate as silk, and does not harm the bone, nor the nerve, and such a disease if called "healthy" is not truly called a fistula, but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, then it is called a fistula; and the skin if it is cut all at once, and at the same time when it is delicate, as silk; and it does not rot for corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and cannot stay in place, even with slight movement, it must first be reset.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the belly is round, if it does not allow char, and if you do not cover the skin of the wound as you see fit, and appear in such a way that the belly moves downwards towards the lowest part of the body where it is, since when the belly is round, if it does not allow char and if you do not cover the skin of the wound as you see fit, and appear in such a way that the belly moves downwards towards the lowest part of the body where it is: that the belly moves lightly along the spine, and does not leave any part of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to support the patient's health, and put them on the sick person's back, which covers all the sickness; then cover as forcefully as possible the part of the wound that is largest on the other side, according to the amount of the wound, and place it on the sick person's back to alleviate the belly's pain, and do not leave the great stretch too long after once; and the one who is sick from the wound's pain often feels the pain of the belly, whether it is venom or little or much, or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or fever, and if it has happened or not, and when your medicine has extended itself and you see the nature that jumps from the sick person's back, if you see that the breasts have already settled, and approach the wound; then leave the morning or evening, and when you dress the wound, if you change the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not exposed to the cold. And if the venoms become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advisable that you do not despair of your health, as your health approaches. And if the poisons become subtle and short after a long journey, it is advis
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that arises from the finger, either the thumb or the other, or by chance in other parts; and when it becomes infected, if it is not cared for, then the abscess suppurates and rot and putrefy as it reaches the root of the finger, and in rare cases it reaches the entire finger; and it comes to the corrosions of the bone, as there is pain, and it is the head that becomes large, and the color turns foul.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, then you must cut off all the excess that is grown on the finger, then cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the skin, and it begins to prick, and burn, then you should cut off the nail that points the skin, and draw it up, and apply some subtle and gentle medicine under the skin, and then treat the wounds as they heal.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	2. And if the corrosion is in the bone, then it should be cut off, and taken out as soon as possible, because as much of the bone becomes corrupted and rotten, so much the worse for the patient; and if you see the other bone starting to rot, then treat it as soon as possible; and if it is hard, cut it off, and it will cause great pain, then it should be sown back in place, and the nail should be cut down to size, and made to fit over the bone that was removed, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if this happens, then use something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the shoulder
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The dislocation of the shoulder that occurs in some people by chance is very rare, and rarely it happens to the same side, and never it happens to the other shoulder, and no one is born with this dislocation, or the birth is in no one of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who do not move in any joint pain, and those who are dislocated at the joint of pain, rarely move; the size of the one who is dislocated is lighter, in a part: size the in its root of a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are dislocated at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you have pain in the shoulder.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the event of a fracture that needs to be treated from the back, if you first manage to cover the bone completely with the bandage, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then care for it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come are either born with them, or from wounds, or from burns, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If the swelling covers the wound, and it must be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two layers or rolled-up cloths, not soggy, or put between two pieces of soft flax, as long as the wound is swollen, if that is possible.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When the patient comes to none of his two with the hand, if it is hot enough, then so be it.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	There are large, full breasts that are enveloped in melancholy superfluities, which come to more and more members of the chest; and more of them appear on the legs of those who go to prayer and work and carry, than on others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, it is necessary that you never administer any purging of colic, and then the proper dose of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is according to two methods: one is on the heat, and it draws out the black blood; and the other method is when you believe the vein, and you pull it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The first sentence to translate: "The size of the wound is according to this method: first cut the hot leg of the large frog, as much as it can be done without being too subtle, then draw the leg of the wounded horse from the knot of the tail to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in I or II or III, with a wide cut, then ease and tie off the black blood in your hand, one after the other, as much as possible without causing too much pain for the patient's strength; and then close it, and command that it be sewn with black meat threads; and resume the evacuation and cleaning of the wounds when the veins are smoothed, and use care with the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The first step in treating an abrasion is as follows: cut the patient's leg, if it has hair, then put it in warm water, and make the leg turn red and hot, and inflame the veins; and if there is no burning, then heat the water and then place it on the long end of the bone at the top of the big toe or in the arch of the foot; then wrap the leg with bandages, and scrape the leg until it turns red and black, and when it feels like a thick rope; then cut the bandage when the leg is dry, as much as it seems to be a thin cord; then bite the other end, as soon as it is raised, and then wrap it with another piece of cloth, as many times as you have done, and then gently press it, as you have done before; then cut another piece, or more if you have them, and gently press it, and then lift it, and gently press it at the second end, and then remove it from one size to another, as much as it is all, and then cut it; and if you cannot lift or carry it, and if an awl pierces the thickest part of the finger twice, and then cut and lift it, and the awl, and then cut the rind, and turn your hand from one side to another, as much as it is; and keep it from cutting, for if it cuts, then you cannot lift or carry it, and it comes to harm to the patient; and after you have treated it, put the leather of the wound smooth and rough with wine and rose oil.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the limb is tightened and twisted and wrapped around together, and it is not straight as we have said, but if you must cut it roughly, do not cut through the bone; and the wound should be treated as we have described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The hard iron that is used to cut the bone if it is bent, and does not cut through the skin, is because it would cut the vein; and it is a large cutting tool, because if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but it is large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein of the arm
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the ground where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the skin of the snake, as it comes from the belly to the head, encased between the skin and the char.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	When the signs of the beginning of this wound are seen if it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, and the wound starts to issue pus like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is opened, if you cover it with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches wide, and wrap it around the leg, and leave the cloth on as long as it does not fall off, and when it falls off, and the cloth; and if it is too long, then cut a part off, and cover the remaining part with the cloth, and do not cover the root with it, until it is all exposed; because if you cover it, it will return to the body, and bring in gangrene and putrid matter or pus, and cause further illness. For this reason, it is necessary that it be treated as soon as possible, and do not leave any part of it untouched or uncovered; and there is no time for this wound when it is treated with V hands of long, or X, and some hands came to me, and it was X hands of length, and when you cover it, if it bleeds or oozes, and the cloth is cut jusc’a fons, so that all is stopped; and take the material that is dampened, and apply it to the patient’s food without any drink for a day, then the cure is like the apostes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And no time at this vein hands rain, and moreover when it opens in the joint of the shoulder or the shoulder, and it comes out with pustules, and which it jumps rain; cure the patient as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the verses that are born between leather and char
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "disease of beef" because it often occurs in the shoulder, and is a small worm that passes between leather and char, and goes up and down throughout the body, and sends pain to every limb as it goes through the skin or flesh; and it is caused by certain humors, such as serpents, snakes, and worms, and ascarios or intestines; and one doubts its evil, because when it passes through the body, it goes to the head, and comes to the oil, by chance enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the patient being cured and dressing, if it cannot be otherwise, then if you find that the limb is tightly bound with a strong bandage, then cut it and take it off, and put it in the char, and do not tie it, if the cauterization by fire is done as mentioned, until it is dead; and the greatest harm it can cause, if it comes to the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the oil, if the hair is tightly tied around it, then cut it off, and take it off; and it is necessary to use the cautery of mundification of liquid medicines for the humors of the patients, and avoid foods that are spicy for nourishment.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from dislocation
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is known in our country as "wakirig," and is a pain that comes in various parts of the body, and moves from part to part; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called a female patient, and I saw my arm, and saw a small flesh in the vein of my wrist; and after a short time, I saw it rise as if it were a wire from the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as if it were gold when it is cut from the hand to another; the pain left that part, and moved to the shoulder, and then in a short time spread throughout the body, until it came to the other wrist; then she told me that she dislocated her shoulder, just as you see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed to see how it moved from limb to limb, as I had never wanted this disease to happen in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I wanted to make sure that the pain was not moving from one part of the body to another, but I did not want it to be so, as I see it in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman had hard breasts, and the veins were exposed, and because the constraint appeared due to this; and I did not know that according to this reason, it is not for those who are delicate and have moist breasts and veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	When you see this disease curing, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if the limbs and bones are weak, and then it is constrained to the bed; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see with your eyes, the cure of this which relieves the weakness, if like pills of sassafras, and pills of snake root, and similar things.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the hardness of the horses' necks or not.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and bristles, and scales; and some have angles, and some have tails, and some have pieces; and one that pierces in any member in different ways: or in the principal member, if it is like a chevelure, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestine, uterus, vessel, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she finally reaches any joint of these limbs, and the sign of death appears that I will tell you later, it becomes apparent to you: if you want to avoid the extraction of this arrow, because death follows in its wake; and when this sign does not appear to you, and the wound is not deep, if it is not too late, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of death appears when the arrow pierces the bone and comes out through the skin, and the part where the arrow entered is where the eye was, and it causes blackness and madness and fainting and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of cold; and by chance it does not cause the nose or ears; and by chance it affects the speech and voice; and a jump of the white, moist wound seems like chills, and as a horse neighs; and if this sign appears to you, if you hold on to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not deep.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it pains or swells is that it is near the medial malleolus, and it feels as if it is becoming hard like a stone, not empty; and by chance the shoulder becomes as firm as the thigh, and in dark red blood comes out, and there is cold and cold frost, and sinking: then the signs of death begin to appear.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the eye that is not moving is that there are no plains of ecchymosis from the wound, and the throat swells, and the face turns pale, and he gasps high and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	1. If the arrowhead is in the covering of the breast, then it hits the small ribs; and it causes great pain and suffocation; and all the members of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	2. If the arrowhead hits the stomach by chance, and there is no wound, then nothing digested in the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	3. If the arrowhead hits the stomach and there is no wound, and there is no hope for the cure or the extraction of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	4. If the arrowhead hits the bladder and the urine jumps out and comes out in a stream, and the patient feels great pain: fatal wounds.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and chest and shoulder and spine and the helper and the spinal column of the back and the forceps and the thighs, and the seeming member, are safe according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the artery is in the joint or the wound, and it is not visible, as I will tell you if I remember, because you are making the joint.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I have seen a bone cut in the root of the nose: I tried to remove it, and it was stuck by the grease of the ear, but it was finally removed without much pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And then there was a case of an arrow that fell into the grease of the oil of ointment and stuck, and it was not possible to reach any further than the tip towards the other side, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, with no weight on the shoulders; the patient was healthy, and none of them had any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there was an arrow in the throat of a man, and it was the Arabian sauce for ears: I was the beards, and very subtle as I found it, and it was healthy for the men.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And then there was an arrow in a man's chest or belly, and I thought he would die; and then after 30 days, if it did not change its position, I cut off the arrow, engaged it, and reset it, and it did not have any accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If you see a home where a boil or abscess is present, and it has been sutured; and the boil does not come out, and does not follow its natural dispositions, and does not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	If you see another man, where a boil is present in his face, and it has been sutured; and he does not suffer great pain; and there are other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	If a boil is found in the face of a king, who was infected and declined on the left side; and the boil was fully healed three years later. I was called to care for it after it was healed.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If you find the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried it with all my subtlety and did not feel it; but I felt a sharp and painful prick in my left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I had placed in the pus-filled abscess, because the wound did not swell; but I saw that it was actually from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed the plaster on my hand and squeezed the wound on the left side, and it took a long time for the pain to subside, until I felt the arrow in my shoulder; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed my hand on the poisonous wound that was infected, and felt the head of the arrow that had pierced the skin; then I continued to treat the wound with the poisonous medicine as soon as the head of the arrow became visible; it healed completely in four months, and then I excised the remaining parts of the arrow and my own nails, which I could not remove; therefore, I did not stop refining and inventing ways to extirpate it, as soon as I took hold of the wound with well-made needles, according to its form at the end of this chapter, as soon as I saw it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the patient believes that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it therefore, and the wound was soothed and the patient was cured completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I am telling you about the quality of extracting some arrows, if you put your care in what I say, because the books cannot make everything look beautiful; but the masters make the best use of a few good things, and of what is present and lacking, they do nine works, and nine instruments, from the descending of the things drawn down this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are stuck in order according to two ways: either by the leg or they enter, or by another part; and the one that is thrown through the thigh or it enters, is an arrow that has entered into the flesh, and it has never been thrown once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, if she lets the char stay until the hair is completely burned off and the end is clean; and then she gets stuck in the bone, and she cannot get out if there are no gaps, and each gap; and therefore she jumps, and if she jumps, if she perceives at any point that something is subtle inside, as long as the end is whitened, and then it slides out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrowhead gets stuck in the bone of the shoulder, and it wounds one of the major muscles, or any of the accidents I have mentioned to the barber: if he does not remove it at once, but leaves it until it is calmed after some time, for if he does not remove it, it will cause death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	When the bone is not broken only in the bone itself, and does not come out of place, and no other injury occurs, then the patient will recover without any problems.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is broken in two parts and cannot be put back in place, then if you manage to apply bandages immediately as I have told you, then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the bone is not visible in the limb, and you cannot see it, and you want to try everything; and if you feel it, if it does not fit any instrument; and if you do not want to cause further pain and swelling of the wound, and for the sake of the bone, and the cartilage, and there is no nerve or vein, then treat the bone as much as the wound is large; and then cut or break the ears of the bone, as much as you can, and then tie the ears of the bone, so that you can treat it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you do not once, if the bone is still wet until it is read, then take it out, because the extraction hurts.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the dislocation of the bone is against what we have said in the chapter, then do not follow what we have said; and prepare for incision on the nerve and vein, and make an incision according to how you will treat the arrowhead when it comes out, whether slowly or quickly, or firmly or elementally; and make the physician according to the shape of the arrowhead that was inside, because it is the greatest help that can be given, and if you do not follow what they tell you, then they will show you the sign.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The first line translates to: "The arrow that came from another part, whether it opened anything of his, or the skin is compressed in some place where one can see or feel it: then pull it out as far as the prongs can hold, and then extract it: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you turn your round hand around as much as possible when it enters the bone, and widens the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, if you leave it alone, and then continue the extraction as much as possible when it draws back; and if it is the arrowhead and it is in the instrument, if the arrowhead enters the instrument's hair, and the instrument points at the end of the arrowhead, then pull it out, and if the arrowhead is in the hair, and the instrument point enters it, to lighten the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is buried, then it is necessary that you cut through the entire arm or remove the poison, and then cure the wound as best as possible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is stuck in the chest, belly, or abdomen, and it is protruding, then you must cut it out, and then pull it out slowly; and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then clean the wound as much as possible, and continue the cure until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the spikes used to treat arrows resembles the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are several ways to do it: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed nail is like that of a bird's feather, inserted at the tip of the arrowhead, just as shown in this figure.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the nails to be driven and pulled out is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of large size.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins that are safe to cut, of which the largest is XVI, which is located after the ears, called the two "herbech" arteries; and the other two arteries located in the temples; and the veins located in the temples of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein located at the front of the head; and the vein located at the chief of the nose; and the gingers located at the collar; and the veins located in the lips of the mouth, called the "augeherich" veins; and the veins located below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The first sentence to translate is: "Les voinnes dont on saine communément sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composté de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The saved vein is the one located between the auricula and the anus, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one is the left coronary dou pochet dou senestre costeit, and the second sophene which is at the ankle dou destre costeit; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other costei; and in the other leg there are three veins like those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The healing of the veins after the ears if a help to the ancient catheters and migrations; and the quality of the healing, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and clean the leu or the veins are of a rough cloth; then the patient's head sticks to the vis, as the veins appear behind the ears in the two dependents of the head: take that to your child, and if you feel the pain in your child's head, then sighed; then take the lancet, and cut through the vein joint, then hold your hand gently on all the veins until the cure is well done, and sew and the leather and the veins well together, and I have already said the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	1. The health of the two arteries located in the temples, if they are prone to old age and decay, and become habituated, and in the course of tears they have moisture; and it is said that this is healthier if it is as I say: and it is that the physician draws his collar as far as the veins open widely; and it feels the coolness on your nail, and then increases; then gently press on the pulse at the top of your index finger, and pull out the lancet, and gently press on the pulse at the top, and the wound, just as you have done in other pulses, and make the sacrifice according to your need; then remove the physician, and put your index finger on the pulse for an hour, then put cotton; and then form the wound, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, or beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient's leg of the front is as sick as the head of the cranium with ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and bruising; and if the patient feels that the physician draws his collar tight by twisting, as the eye appears; then take the instrument called "fistula" which is shaped like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and firmly hold it with your hand or another thing, and let the blood ooze out according to the quantity you see; then tell the physician to tighten the collar, and hold the eye until it is safe and never once with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Every time, it only matters that the flames are too thick; and the right way, because the bone is close, and by chance the flames break when they are being subdued.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The healing of the two veins that are in the armor if they help the bones, and the shoulder, and the wound, and the gallbladder in the bile, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their healing if it is that the patient pulls his collar with his neck twisting from no string, as before; then the healing, and so the healing of a long vein, a little wide, a little large flame, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they are very sharp; then make quick incisions as much as you can, and then sew them up, and hold them well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein is not good if it swells, and is painful, and diseases of the face, as well as wounds, and burns that come into the face, and especially when they are old; and the quality of the health if the skin is dry on the neck, then press the vein with your left hand, and take a subtle flame and stick it in the corner of the eyelid between the two eyes, because the vein does not open well, and now it will begin to bleed; and do not apply too much pressure, and make incisions as needed, and sew them up at night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	1. If the ginger helps in the astringing of the aliments, and at the beginning of digestion, and in many diseases, and in corroding, and herpes, and empetigine; and if the quality of the ginger is that it tightens the neck of the patient on both sides, as we have said; and if the physician is present at the lou chief of the patient, and the patient is lying down, then cleanse the vein of the patient for a long way, then drain the blood in large amounts, then take care of the temperament as much as possible; then do another part on the other vein, then loose the limbs, and tighten the veins gradually so that the patient does not twist; and leave it until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips of the deer helps to close in the mouth, and prevents corruption of the gums, teeth, and gums, and toothache.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit before you, and tighten his collar as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the eyes, of which one is on the right side and the other on the left, and they are black because of their dark color and the darkness of their lower eyelids: therefore, cut off both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then cut off the larger one and all others, and do so for all the eyes that are swollen and closed, because it is a similar way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the diseased tongue of the mouth
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	If the diseased tongue of the mouth is caused by illness after the diseased head, and it is at the gullet, and there are diseases of the throat, and there are diseases of the mouth; and if you can determine the healthier one, if the patient has moisture between their hands in front of the sun, and they gently touch the tongue, and look at each side of a black vein: healthy on both sides, and do not take too much, for these are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The common costly veins that are usually healthy in two ways: either by gently touching all around the flame, or with a thin olive oil as you would with trenchers, and they are called "aneth"; and they are wide and thin according to the size and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the burned face is such that it is named according to its size, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the skill to open the long veins of large blood vessels that contain large blood and cause trouble; and this is the form of the burned olive-skinned face.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle applied, and it is safer for the small veins, or if there is subtle serum citrin.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The health of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are low in the throat, and the collar, and the stomach, and the abdomen; and it is necessary for the health to be wise, and to avoid the artery that is low.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If it pricks the artery, and blood comes out, if it is needed to be stopped, as I have said; and it should not be too tight around the flame, but cuts as needed like scissors.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basin does not open clearly, and it is necessary to pull it, and change another one; or you do not want any rain on it, or you are in the arm of the vein from the shoulder: it opens clearly; and the heat is applied to the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the vein of the wounded person, and it is necessary to pull the arm, and touch the vein as far as you can reach the groin; then sign the vein as it swells, and then tie the arm, and heat the vein with the flame at the end of the heat: and be careful not to hurt the artery as you see the vein swell, because it is the artery: cut it quickly.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you see coming out from above as if it were the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, and you know that it is not from the artery: then, hold your hand far away, then place your thumb on the area where it is not red, many times; hold the arm, let it be, and do not move the hairs; and so fear, and do not move until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not strained, and it does not hurt you, and the doctor is not present, then the artery may open, for the head of the dislocation; and it should be strained.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a scalpel, sharpen it, and use it to cut, and then take one of the halves and tie it well with the other; if it does not bleed, that is good; if it does, then apply poultices that constrict blood; and the bleeding is not increased in other positions for the small wound of the wound, and the pain in the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein is in danger if it is treated with unclean blood, and with cold, because it is composed of basilic and cerebral matter, as we have said; and it is important for the physician to be careful with the nerve that is cold, and if it does not become too soon, and it is healed, and it becomes full and healthy, and by chance it cannot be healed; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it is necessary to cleanse the nerve with the instrument; and close the nerve on your body.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If blood flows between the two veins, if it is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The salve for the head if it helps, that it attracts blood and helps the wound; and it is helpful in pressing on the olive or mustard flame, because it is the safest of all wounds, because it does not harm the nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Indeed, it is better to try the lighter one first, and do not worry if it does not work the first time, and then continue; and by chance, it may cause some discomfort in some people, but it does not hurt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that it is to maintain good health and avoid diseases coming; and it should be made in one of the three veins: it is to know, head, fast, and basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of the day and before noon and after dinner, when the sign of repletion appears; and it should be done on the first or second day, after two or three hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is affected by diseases has no determination, but when it comes to hunger or thirst, in all hours and at all times; and it does not matter how healthy children are up to the age of 14, or women who carry only for four months before nine months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When the patient feels better, if it is possible to deflate the intestines of a light cyste, if it has no feces retained, and if the wounds are not full of impure substances; and if it is not too much full of meat, or yeast, and even if it is from colic, vomiting, and disorder of the stomach, and multiple childbirth, and excessive labor and sleeplessness, and whatever virtue, or by something of the arm or the large gut; then subtly the humors, if it is not too big, by meat and drinks and medicines, you can do so; then take a bath, and nothing harms you, to thin the blood, and make yourself healthy from the veins, as we have said; and keep away from work, and pleasure, and luxury, and such things; and be modest and joyful, and be healthier than the one you are now, and rub your arm two or three times or four; then draw out the string gently, for if it is too tight or small, it cannot be drawn out without; then draw out the string with your hands as the wounds heat up, and feel them; then make the ointment hot with some oil, and put it in your left hand on the wound of the limb that has been made sick, a little or more, so that the wound does not get worse when it is healed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like cords to the healer, and if they are so many that they are plainly visible, then when one puts the fire to it, if it retreats from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of these; and if the vein is too tight, for which reason the healers must be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; but if not, then it continues a little more of that joint or quickly, and if it is not reduced.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the joint is reduced and the patient is in pain, let it be left for an hour or two, and do not tie the arm: by chance, wounds may come; do not bathe, then return to the healer as soon as you feel like it; and if the wound is small, or the skin is subtly cut and you doubt that there are so many sutures as you see, then the healer will be very careful with this wound; and if it is a little painful, but the joint is reduced, then do not tie the arm too tightly, for this has happened many times when the wound was small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	1. If you see the joint swell, if it does not recoil back to its health, and put a little oil on it, as it soothes the corset of the wound, and makes it drier in this joint that the oil lies; and then apply oil to each healthy vein as you clean them, to strengthen the course of the wound; and this same thing causes triaicle and bowe of the use, when it is put on the joint; if subtly it does not return and spreads when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there are many abscesses that come often, and it is only healthy when the vein opening is small, if you haste, and put an wet sponge on the joint, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the end of the wound, and if it does not leave the joint after a few days without any black or green, if you do not notice; and if you see, put nothing of aloes or remedy made in the juice of ale, mustard, or like.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is inflammation and appearance of the health of the basilica: put your hand there, and if you find the joint very tight in the compression of your hand, that is the appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Be sure that you do not put anything on this side, as by chance it may cut the artery; but I have made it dry to strengthen the joint, then another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each drop of blood according to its quantity and color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, let it out as long as it is red; and if you see it large, let it out as much as it becomes thin; and if it is too cold, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	1. It is necessary for the one who is in pain and forceful, and has skill in extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the wide flaps; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is healthier and often safer, and it should be done by cutting across, not pricking; and this way of healing is saved from the dislocation of blood and the strength of nerve, and it is worth that the healthier long wound is not wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	1. And for the one whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give thin bread in the juice of cooked pomegranates; if it is hot, then three times or four times; and if it is of cold complexion, then before the thin bread, in honey or aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, and well-odored honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If it becomes inflamed after the evacuation of blood, if it happens that it sweats with char and a subtle scent, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of sincope for the evacuation of wind.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it sees its arms venting blood, and becoming less inflamed again, if it happens, when it is inflamed with great inflammation, that it becomes less sick each time, according to the amount of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if it sees its arms venting blood after the first inflammation, and it is strong, that it becomes less sick seven hours after the first inflammation, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	If it is healthier from another part, then it should be healthier the following year or the next.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has a flow of blood from the body that has been scrubbed, and brings on fever; if it comes to draw out great quantities, and enlarge the wound as much as it can; then that you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so that the death does not come in pneumonia, and this happens many times when the healthy ones are negligent; and it does not matter if you see the arm wet, and make the blood flow again, and the wound is closed, then you must press on the pulse; but if it is cold, then extend the arm as quickly as possible, because it would be wrong; but leave it as long as it is healthy the second time; or you do not touch the tip of the flame, until the one who is frozen has a wound from the vein returned, and puts on a piece of cloth that is in cold water, and gently presses on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is inflamed, and it is left without being held steady, as long as the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If it is necessary to draw blood again, if the vein is in the same limb or in another one, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is located near the shoulder, because it is composed of.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the vein is made healthier if it is pricked with a hot needle, as long as the blood is bright red; then it should be tied tightly, if the vein bleeds well, then the blood should now flow through it, not too wide or too long; and the wound should be large, and the hand should be healthy near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be healed, then it should be re-pricked with a hot needle, and let the blood flow in warm water as much as possible; and if this is the case, do not prick the vein with a hot needle again, because it will cause more harm than good; and the vein of this arm is safer than all other veins, because it has not been punctured or cut.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	1. The health of the saved hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the way: tightly wrap the hand, and heat it with hot water, as long as the vein is not frozen, if you can; and if it is cold, and you feel it throughout, then do not apply too much heat, because the skin is bare and prone to freezing, and then put the hand back in warm water, if it does not thaw in the wound, and it cannot be thawed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated as much blood as you can, if you put the vein oil and seal it with a bandage, and then make a small wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient with the sick hand should be treated on the left hand side if it is affected by mouse disease, and I will do as I have said on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the soul is a problem with the heart and many other diseases such as those of the liver, retention of flowers, and gallbladder disease, as well as old leg problems and similar issues.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of their sickness if it is that the patient has fever and the vein is washed with warm water until it is dry, and the joint of the puncture is cleaned; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and by cleaning the wound in the rain, or at the ankle, which is larger than the rain that you have.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	If you clean the wound with your own hands, if there are no nails that are too long, and the wound is cut in the same way as before; then apply the flax.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If you cannot remove it, set the wound on fire, and let it dry well at the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	If the wound heals the first time, if it recurs in the second place due to a small amount of pus, because the pus is salty; do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and then apply sophee neatly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The pain of the sciatic wound is at the ankle of the foot, and its healing is equivalent to the pain in the thigh, when it is full of pus.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And judge the quality of its health if it is that the patient enters or bathes, and draws forth the ankle IV by twisting, as otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then the healthy in all ways that you can, and crossing; and it is best to cover it, as the lewer is safe and it is properly returned to the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not cover it, then the healthy none rain of that which opens or the back does not have any pain, and towards the little door; and make as much purge as you see, and then loose the tie, and put on cotton and draw it; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	The first sentence to translate is "des sainies de ventouse". The
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or iron, or silver; and ventilation is performed in two ways: either by cutting and drawing out pus, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	1. This ventilation that is meant to cause pain can be done in two ways: either completely on fire, or by fire; and ventilation that is made by cutting and extracting pus is made in twelve different ways of the chest, where some are all in one part of the neck; and the others are in the shoulders; and the others in the two costal cartilages; and the ventilation of the chin; and the ventilation of the two shoulder blades; and the ventilation of the two arms; and the ventilation of the two thighs; and the ventilation of the two calves; and this ventilation does not cause pain, only slight ones that are scattered throughout the chest, and for this reason there is no need to fear any disease that comes from repletion, as long as all the hearts are empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	When necessary for diseases, or due to habits, if the patient coughs every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and more so in each ten; for some have such a heavy chest that when they cough, they are in great pain; and those who have bloody displacement and swelling in their face, and in their neck, and at the collarbone, and are pale; and those who have a fever in their mouth, and lose their tongue, and spit blood; and if it is those who sneeze, and see redness, and swelling, and death, and such things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and even before the month is over, we order them to rest after three hours each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The health of the head helps in relieving pain... what comes to the eyes, and it is only after the evacuation of all the blood; and this rest is in the care of the head doctor, and it is only for those who have a cold complexion or are feverish, as this does great harm; and therefore, only those who have cold diseases should use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal quickly become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to reduce the rest period due to the fear of obedience.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The first line of the translation is: "The ventilation of the wind in the neck is in the body of the healthy chest and the basilica, and for this it is useful in the emergency of pain, and to cut the umbilical cord, and for all, and for repletion; and it is recommended to be tight, because it holds too firmly, either the stomach or the belly or the chest.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The second line of the translation is: "The ventilation of the wind in the neck is useful for the pains of the chest, and it relieves and alleviates them, and for traction, and for the pain as the roots of the teeth, and it is in the body of the healthy basilica; and it is necessary that you command the patient to express his hand when putting it, that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause dislocations of the bones.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings of the ventricles do not reach the disease of the mouth, and the corruption of the genitals, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the saliva of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the spines indicate disease that comes from chlorine and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the ribs indicate as much as the third veins of the arms, because they attract blood from these large veins; and commands the patient not to stretch too far, because it is not suitable for char, and knows how to narrow and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	1. The suction device that is used on the mare is too large and not sharp enough, causing it to be ineffective against deep wounds and diseases. It needs to be made larger and sharper so that it can effectively treat the wound. Additionally, if it is too subtle, it may cause further harm. However, it has caused many injuries.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	1. The suction devices on the legs are effective in drawing out blood from all parts of the body, relieving old pains from rains, and alleviating pain from the bladder and uterus. They also stretch the vagina and are located between the second metacarpals and second metatarsals. However, they can cause the body to weaken over time and lead to more serious conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	1. The manner of applying the cautery is to first empty the vessel, and then place it in the fire, stirring evenly, and continue doing so until you see the redness and swelling, and the appearance of blood; then close it, and return the cauterys, as some have sharp edges and clear pores: if it is to be used only once, and to make large wounds, and a few are found to be painful; and apply it lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	2. And if the vessel is not large enough, it may be injured twice: the first time by slightly increasing the size of the vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the limb is not quickly treated, it may be injured a third time; and when we only need to remove a little blood once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If we need to remove a lot of blood, if it happens often; and if the limb is not quickly treated, if it is injured severely, and if it is not perceived soon, then apply to the skin of those with thick hair and hard skin, and to those who have wounds that are not deep, with oils that are easily absorbed and dissolved: either with oil of violets, or with the oil of sweet almonds, or with the oil of the seed of cucurbite; and if it is with ivory, with the oil of parsley, or with lis, or with chamomile, or with another similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take warm oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and apply them.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is tender and large pores, it is not recommended to put oil on it, but it is recommended to wash it after the application of vinegar, whether it is hot, cold, or vinegar of mushrooms, or vinegar of squash, or vinegar of porcelain, or another similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if the one who has moisture, then if it rises from silk, or vinegar of mustard, and vinegar of mint, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluity rise from wine vile, or from ague of sweat, or from decoction of anet or camomile, or from other similar causes; and they are not healthier before bathing than after, but rather an hour or two after bathing; and they do not sleep before ventilating, and they should wake up when it is time to ventilate, and when they are ventilating.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And when those who are healthy become cold and too hot and inflamed, if they crave cold things like apples, endives, and leeks in milk, and similar things; and they consume pork, cheese, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	1. Those who have a cold complexion, if they sweat honey syrup, and aromatic wine that is between winter and spring, and consume little, and consume pungent foods and thin oils and pickles and juices; and when they start to sweat, they must drink more than usual; and it is necessary to give some men once a triaicle or muscate before the ventosacion, or afterward, to comfort the principal members; and it should be done subtly, but only those who are chilled by drinking.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	1. The wounds that are made to be felt are those that are made in the liver, and in the spleen, and gout, and in the stomach and bowels and bladder and hips, because this member does not suffer much pain from wounds, and only feels it when there is pain in one part of the body, as we do with our breasts when we are sick; to remove viscosity that is in the member, as we remove wounds from the stomach and bowels to soothe the member; and to relieve the pain when it has opilliation or piercing, if it is relieved by its own attraction of opilliation, or if it is lacking in piercing from the limb; and they are made when they are placed in the liver and in the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these wounds are administered empty to suck only; and never are they administered together with fire, and never with hot aqua tede, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner we fill the wound with hot water, or with water that has been cooked with herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the forceps administered by fire is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The form of the forceps administered by fire is: It has two sides of palm width and half, and has a cost on either side of the petite pertus, like a needle, and is made of iron or copper, so that it does not pierce the patient's skin when putting it in the member; and in the middle, there is a groove of iron or copper, for a spring to be placed, and there are large and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them, because the forceps of children are different from viels, and thin than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	1. And it must be set on the wound of the member: take the cork or liniment, and put it in the wound through the handle that is in the wound, so that the cork or liniment is at the end of the wound where it does not burn the patient; then put it on the member, and you must be as we have said, if you see, if there is vapor, and if you take the wound; and take the liniment as before, and renew it often, if you can.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	1. In the wound that is maintained in a sickle-shaped cough, with no veins or bubbles, and is only made when it is clear of cough, and is put on the member only when it is clear of cough; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	1. Withouts are not stolen except in parts where it is not possible to put ventouses due to their smallness, such as the lips and genitals, and similar parts; and in these parts withouts are removed by cutting, if it is not possible or not, and other similar things; and the quality of the user is that when you find withouts that are in soft waters, if you take them; you put them in a soft water bath, as long as they are family-like, and have no bellies; then it is healthy for the vein and the ventouse, then clean the member as much as it is red, and put on the withouts; and when they are smooth and look good, if it is the knee or the elbow, you put it on, because this is after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift the leg of the wound, and then the limb; and if the patient is healthy too soon after the surgery, then take cold linen and wrap it around the wound, and put it on as long as the wound is bleeding; and if the wound bleeds more, then take hot vitrol or galls, and similar things, until it stops bleeding; or you can cut the leg in half of the dead flesh, and leave them as long as they are charred on the leg, until it is now healed; and if you have more time, then take other dead flesh.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take on their dressing, if you cleanse the limb with cold water, or you thread an needle as long as it does not soak, and then sew them in, and as they feel the sand, if they ache; and when you see that they are healing, if you powder some aloe and silk cloth, or charcoal, if they now burn.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	You should know, dear friend, that this chapter is not without its merits, as there are no ancient books or letters that mention it; and for this reason, the science has been neglected in our land, because I have never found any book on the subject; and I do not know if anyone else has, except perhaps through the science of ancient books, or by my own study of the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the shapes of the strangulations that are mentioned, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the words and chapters or the sayings where one puts their understanding, and they measure the truth, so that those who have experienced it may learn this noble art, and they teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or twisting, and it comes to any part of the body, if nothing else helps, then it is like a weak man, or child, or old woman; or if you hold it tightly, it is too tight, or too loose; and if you loosen it too much, it is to know that the cold joints, and the shoulders and elbows, and do not drink cold drinks, nor eat thin soups, nor fill the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt of apoplexy, or expansion of matter in the member; if the patient improves under the same government that he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it comes to passing through the patient's meat that makes a large wound, or if it is viscous, like dough that rises and cracks, and tests, and pies, and pancakes made of wool, and cheese, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the healing wound becomes less painful and the fracture is sooner healed.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that fractures of the bones and degenerations are not well recovered or healed according to their nature by the growth of the limbs, and those who are too flexible, like the bones of small children; but if it is a large bone that is broken and jointed with the member, as much as it was before, and does not return to its former shape, and does not heal due to large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the leg or arm, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes from the top of the skull, and another that is slicing, like the size of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each fracture has its own engine and tool in restoration, according to what remembrance comes to the patient's mind; and the fracture of the bone is by that which is twisted, and wide open by defuire, and some are pressed by the hand; and if it is not twisted or frenched, and the pain is not great in the malady, there is no fracture, but there may be twisting or frenching or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you can only manage to move it with your hand, but use the medicines that will come later, and then the dislocation will be treated subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should be aware of the fracture that will occur in the shoulder, and the two parts that are separated should be reunited as soon as possible, unless it causes death; and if it causes death, then leave it alone until the pain subsides, and then gently and wisely put it back in place and realize that the restoration of the shoulder is lighter than the restorations of other bones or pieces; then the dislocation, if it can be done after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	When there are broken pieces in the bone of the foot, if they are two parts, it is hands or fingers, or in your hand, it is some small members, or in the tendons, or in one tendon and in your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are adjusted, if you reset by your own efforts the additions in their place in the muscles that you please, and keep that by your effort does not cause the surgeon's injury or pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels good in your hand if it seems that it is not well: if it curves beautifully and is not strained too much, do not press as those who come by their own effort cause the aposteme chaut and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at its limit, if the patient well holds the shoulder that it does not move, neither by watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor otherwise; and it is well that the member be firmly held so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, if it is not at its limit, and it is necessary to put the member in a proper position so that it does not feel any pain; and hold it firmly so that twisting does not occur when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I will tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It is said that the broken limbs are of different sizes in smallness and breadth and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	1. For the patient has lost limbs, just like you have lost your teeth and similar parts: if it happens to wrap cloths of fine linen and silk; and those that are large, if it is like a wide and hard rope, because the wide ropes tighten all the large member, and draw it evenly, unless it has no joint; then it wraps light and loose bands three or four times around the member, and holds the hand tightly along the entire rope, then goes to the end of the break and tightens it less than the break does, because the break only slightly widens the break; and softens the rope a little at a time, until you have taken a large part of the healthy skin, then take another rope, and turn the end towards the broken part, and tighten it gently, not too much or too little, as we said in the first part of the break; then go between the loose ends of linen or silk, until they are even, and then tie everything with a good knot, and then put your beads well made on, if it has not become inflamed or swollen.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if it has been struck or infected, if he puts on something soothing for the infected part and that relieves the pain, and leaves it alone for some time; then straighten your eyes, and they should be of a width of one and a half fingers' breadth, or of a sharp edge like a knife, or of the rains of palm, and they should be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	However, it is necessary that the one who puts on the wound make it larger and wider than the others; and it should be as long as the member of small or large size; then straighten your eyes in the same way as you did at the first session, then tie a thread around it, as you did at the first session, but not too tight; and the thread should be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of linen; for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen the works of fools who make their knots with linen threads, it is a great mistake, for the wound cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is only necessary that there be less than an inch between each eyelet;
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is found by the helpers after the castration of the males, if they are not clean, then they should put on clean linen or cloths, so that they do not get sick.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bandage, and the edges are torn, I will tell you the treatment for this after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And be careful not to strain too much on all the broken limbs in the first hour.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put them in bandages immediately, but rather after V hours or VII, or according to your skill in plastering; and here is the way of the old plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: and that you take flour that is between the mills, and knead it with a great deal of beer, and make this dough, neither too thick nor too thin, and use it, and this is the common way of restoring fractures in other positions, and even in women and children, because it is not too tight or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	1. Another way to mend fractures and dislocations and twists: take barley and linseed and oil and Arabian gum and gum, in the ratio of 1:10; mix with aloes, in the ratio of 1:5; alechil, in the ratio of 1:7; and make a powder, and mix with cow dung; if the complexion of the face is hot, use this plaster as it is of good composition and restores fractured bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	1. Another way to relieve twisting: take gum and vismallow, in the ratio of 1:10; mix with aloes, in the ratio of 1:5; acacia, in the ratio of 1:3; arsenic, in the ratio of 1:2; and dry well, and cook with vinegar or cow dung, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other ways to use the plaster on joints and bones, and ease the pain coming, and the wounds use of the bone: take new cloth, and the oil and butter cooked, and put it on the leg.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore the skin, but they are useful for easing the pain of inflammation, and properly treating bone pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make the plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth pottery, and blend them together, and make the plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make the plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce inflammation.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	The root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of quince, each part; and boil, and infuse with wine, and wash the members, and apply with fresh coriander water or wine, or with water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to emplace more forcefully than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Boil the roots of vismalve, and the linseed, balm, honeybee, and sansuce, and violet and chamomile flowers, each part; and boil, and infuse with fresh salt water or sweet water, or with wine, according to the choler of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras states that no material is used to set a broken bone for restoration, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen suggests that when setting a broken bone for restoration, one should use dry things like hot mirrors and aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat injury and pain: take fresh and clean pork fat, or the feathers of geese, and apply it, and the wounds, and the bandages, and then cover the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then a little later, take care that the patient's shoulder does not feel any pain or stiffness in the bones of his arm; if it does not happen by hand, and pain comes to the shoulder, or itching, tingling, or swelling, if you haste, and reduce it, and now press the dressing; take a light fold, a wet sponge, plunge in cold water, and lift the limb as long as the itching ceases and the pain subsides; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moisten with cold or rose oil, and tie with a knot, as you are sure not to be afraid of gangrene; allow the inflammation in the member to subside, and the pain to cease, then resume gentle pressure, a little empress, and do not strain it too much; gently as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the wound is bleeding, swollen, painful, and inflamed, and you have the skill to plaster and dress it, if it recurs, as you did at first, in the same manner.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If you do not see any sign of this that we have said, if it does not occur after three days or four or seven; and never more than twenty days, according to what one sees, as long as the wound is broken and approaches the chariot; therefore, a stronger restraint, and the flesh grows larger, as I have said before; and if you see the flesh drying up more than it should, be careful that no one comes; take care of the warm water, every time you wet it, and keep a little fire going; by this means, you will cut off the norrissemens at the member, and mend what they do to the flesh, so that the member is tortured: this is harmful, and if it is not treated with care, and I know no other way than to be gentle and treat it fairly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various wounds of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of wounds of breaking, and different figures, and the causes are assigned; for there are wounds made by the collision of a spear, and the whole bone is fractured as if it were a hazel or thistle; and therefore this kind of breaking is called «hazel-breaking».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear strikes the bone through its various senses and is called this kind of breaking "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has a collision embedded, or pierced or of the collar of the wound, or of the cheek against the wound, or of other such things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fracture, which approaches the skin that is exposed to the bone, or it is under the bone, and this wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that is reset in the bone just as subtle as a thorn, and it is a small cut, and for this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound that is made by hurting the piercing, or by tearing, or by something else, and makes the piece of the bone enter, and it is the same as when they set the caustics when they were heated on the caustics; if it enters the pierce.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	1. And this happens more often among those with wet bones, just like children's bones; and it occurs in all these ways of fracture that are lightly broken, just like these; and I will speak about it in their language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	2. And let us know all ways of fractures by the removal they cause, and the inquiries made, and by the corrupted char that is caused.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	3. The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone, and rubs it with oil, if the dark fracture is not open,
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	4. In the treatment of the fracture, keep a close watch on the patient's condition, and if you see no serious accidents, such as vomiting of clear liquid, admission of understanding, extension, and pulselessness, and fever, and the wounds becoming red and swollen, and other signs of serious conditions that cannot be cured with doubt,
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the first pain comes to you, and it is in the shoulder, if it is necessary to break the bone before the fourth month of pregnancy, then do so.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this way, and you have already broken the bone before the ninth month of pregnancy, then the tendon around the bone must be rotten, and the accident we have mentioned will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If the bone fracture comes at the end of the tendon that covers the eye, then it is necessary to cut off the damaged part: and if you prescribe the salve of the new mother's wound, and open the bone in all the ways you can, and show the figure of the wound more severe than you can, and if the sand comes out to discover the bone, or the pus comes out, if it helps that it happens, and if you fill the wound with oiled powdered silk; and rest the wound as long as the pus is stopped and is sure of not coming out, and then begin to break the bone, and it is done according to twenty ways of cutting: one way is when you cut at the end that is narrow before, and it is in this form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then, another joint of greater size than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many types of joints, some pointed and others wide, and they are sharp, and are made of iron; and you perform them lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, then you must perforate it with care, otherwise you will injure the joints with toothpicks. Instead, use small pieces of wood or bone that do not penetrate further into the bone than necessary, and have a margin or circle around them that does not allow the tip to pass over the bone. And you must have more of these, so that each one fits the size of the bone, if you have toothpicks for every test; and this is the form of the three methods of toothpicks:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	1. To determine the quality of the break in the bone, you put your thumb on the bone, and turn it until you feel that the bone is perceived; then place your thumb on the other part a little later, and do the rest, then cut through the end of the bone that is between the holes, and do it as subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, as you draw the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments you have, like needles, tweezers; and make sure you do not touch the skull or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	2. When you have perceived and cut the bone, and if you find that the suture is tightened by the bone to all other instruments like a knife, but it should be looser and more subtle than the other knife; and if it does not tighten any small bones, nor any scales, if the light bones are gently with the instruments we have said; then cure the wound with stitches and staples that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of opening is when it is more like that of the Galians, who are safer; and the lock is very tight, and it is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary to first remove a part of the bone, where the fracture is open, so that when you have removed this part, measure from the top of the chief of this incisor lenticular, and it will be in this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the piece is turned in two pieces, if the cutting is towards the bone; then with a small saw, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and be well prepared for the thread that is outside; if it is near the bone, if the bone is light, because it is well understood that it is harmful to the bone, and it causes pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only cracked, and it has small pieces, if they cover that roughness, and smooth out the scales with the subtle grater that you must have several quantities of, to adjust each joint according to the severity and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rub before with coarse graters, and after with more subtle ones, and continue doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair removal and subtle fracture, it is necessary to adjust according to its address; and this is something that cannot be answered by the one who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	1. If the facial injury is discovered, then it is necessary to apply linen dipped in oil to the wound, according to the size of the wound, and place a second layer of doubled linen on top, dipped in wine and olive oil, and placed over the first layer; and make this more gently than you please, so as not to burn the face, then apply other linen layers, and do not strain it too much, only as much as it covers the wound; and leave it on for one or two days, until the swelling is subsided, then remove it, and apply medicines such as rue, flour, salt, incense powder, and aristolochum, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and apply subsequent medicines without burning; and ensure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave the ointment or assemble bowels, because when bowels are assembled under the skin, they can cause great harm to the patient; for if something mordant is placed on the face, it can cause great pain.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	When none of the patients have accidents come to the physician, if we have said so, then there is doubt about the sense of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the black is only brought by medicine that has been given, then a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and put on the face; then the cure is done in the ways of cures that it covers, as long as it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Wise men who have never broken the two parts of the nose, or one only, because they are bones; and this is also cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, then if you can reach your small toe or finger hole, and make the break even with your index finger, and in the pouch as long as it does not deviate from its natural figure; and do this lightly, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain through your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the part of the nail, and cannot be reached by the toe, then if you can put it even with the head of a large pin in the palm,
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the break is in the second part, then if you repeat it, and restore the first joint, if possible; if not, after the ninth or tenth time, when the wound is calmed, then reach for the head of the nail with your thumbs, if the break is in a different part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you cut into another part, if the wound is large; and let the tents be as large as they fill the cavities without causing pain.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no restaurer would say that one must soften the tents with burrs, and each year.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems to me that this is indeed the best, but it must be made soft in the construction of oven ashes and ground bone powder; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never cut on the wings of tents, and if it is soft and hanging, and holds the bracelet, and blows the medicine among; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	If the abscess bursts during the operation, and you do not clean it with oil or fine linen, or in a vessel of wine, it will cause great harm.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess does not burst during the operation, and you cover it with ointment made of flour of eggs and incense powder, mixed with fresh milk, then put on light cloths, and do not close the wound; and if the wound is small, and it is torn into thin pieces, if you can find suitable bandages for it, then wrap it up, and treat the other wounds with ointments and plasters, and sutures, as suitable ointments and plasters are for this; and if there is no sign of infection in the wound, then cure it with splints, and put on bandages, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not deep, but rather a slight one, not breaking into pieces, only slightly, and not as deep as a cone.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the left side, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the right side, then place your index finger on the left hand, lightly press the break, and the injury is treated with the other hand, and it is held firmly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is described as a second degree, then it comes that you administer extension to two parts, as long as they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move or fracture, or if they are torn from a gold, silver, or silk thread, then they should be inserted into the broken lower jaw fragment, and one double cloth strip should be placed; and a well-made iron nail or a piece of leather should be placed along and across the lower jaw according to its length, and it should be tied to the mouth that you use, and the patient should be commanded to lie down, and light foods should be given.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	1. If you see that the limb is twisted, if it does not return to its place within three days, then reset it to where it was originally; then apply a plaster made from flour of the mill with as much urine or flour of sinew as you can stand; after which, apply a lighter plaster, and when it adheres, the dislocation will not change again, leave it as it is until it is healthy; it will be healthy many times in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	2. If the wound becomes infected, if you do not follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	3. If there is a fracture and wound together, cut out a small piece of bone; if the bone is flexible enough to be bent.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is large, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have all these pieces and there is no need to enlarge the wound, if it is large, then make sure to cover it with flexible bandages at this time, in order to heal quickly and become healthy.
de la forcele	of its strength.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks more often in front of the shoulder, towards the elbow, and the break is in three ways: it is broken and split into two, with two pieces, and it is lighter to restore; or it is broken with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	The patient should be examined if there is pain at the site of injury, and if the other end of the bone is swollen, indicating forceful impact; then extend the collar towards the affected area, and place the fracture in your hands so that it forms as intended, ensuring no deformity or instability.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you are more skilled at extension, place the shoulder blade of the patient on the table, and wrap a round or flat object around it according to your needs; then gently apply force, and hold the sphere in your hand, ensuring that the fracture is placed accurately and as intended.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	When you do not treat the head of the strong force as soon as it is injured, because it comes in front, it can cause the patient to lose consciousness and put their hand on their chest or ear, and hold their shoulder and elbow with both hands until the bone of the strong force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two hands, and if you break the fragments, it can happen that you lose them; and try to pull out the light pieces, and if the bone does not join by any means with any projection, if it is at one of the incisions you made; but that you hold the strong force instrument tightly to warn for the face:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and should be as wide as the bone wants, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the muscle; and if there are two heads, as you see, and some are large, and others are narrow, if it is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones, and when you are sure of the rupture, if the wound is small, or you doubt the rupture, if you use the wound with linen and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if aphrodisiacs are used and come, if many oils are mixed with rosewater and alcohol, and it is applied.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	1. The splitting of the bone is when it feels pain and seems too small, you must then powder the fine flour and honeybeeswax, and lightly sprinkle it on, and place a lead ball at the bottom; if you have the means, then take a very large palm leaf, and double-fold the towels, and press them down; then take a thin slip of three inches wide and long, and wrap it around the bend, so that the bend's ends are held down; and place the slip on the wrist, and turn the bend at the wrist, and tighten the slip on the healthy bone, and tighten the sick bone as well, and loosen the bend at the wrist, and when you see that the bend holds the break, and you see clearly that the slip does not move along the broken bone, if it rewards each time, and when it tightens, so that you can lift the injured arm; and make the malice on the back of the malaide, and place it when it falls asleep on the wrist, to raise the helper up; if you align the break with the alignment of the shoulder blade, or if you put the arm at the collarbone, and it does not slip out of place accidentally, then within 20 days, then resume the pressing, if you see that it has use, and hold it and let it go as soon as it is restored; and it is restored in 28 days, and in no fewer than any number of men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and it does not fit when placed, and the acetabulum does not match the figure of the fracture, and it is realigned according to its natural form, in all ways that can be done; then powder the shoulder with sulfur and a lot of urine, and light spices, and put a wide and thin plate, a little wider than the shoulder, and make sure the plate fits evenly in any part of the shoulder; if you use hair from threads, so that the plate fits perfectly; and then tie it with a tight bandage, so that the plate does not move from its place, and look at the linen each time it is loosened, and whenever it is tightened, and put the plate back in its place on the chest; and the shoulder will be repaired in 20 or 25 days, and when these numbers are completed, if you are sure, because this is only lightly set.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	When a piece of bone is torn before, and there is no pain, if it is found out, and the bone, and we do as we have said in breaking the force of the relief of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in the field, but it happens sometimes; but it often breaks at the defense.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the field, if it is not aligned at the base, and there is great pain, and lack of blood, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and opening the wounds in the broken bones, and it feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient's shoulder is dislocated due to injury, and he places his hand between the bones, then he presses the bones, and assembles the ribs of the two costels in your hands, subtly putting them equal to all ways that you can, as long as the bone appears to be in its proper position; then he puts on bandages and poultices on the wound with the finest salt, or another lighter substance, and wraps it in a drape, and binds it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the bandage back on itself, and tightens it, and rewards each hour the lure, and if it becomes loose, either due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the wound, or pain or aposteme, if you haste, and it becomes loose, and relaxes the bandage, and addresses whatever came from the ways of cures; then he reassembles the bandage, and tightens it as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of the rib fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is said that the rib fracture does not occur unless it is after the back, and at the head of the dens, and it does not cause pain because they are fatty; and it is well felt in the inquiry as it should be.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the reduction is if you put the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then place the splint, and tighten with a screw, if you have the skill.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is declining at the dens, it feels very great pain and pressure, like tears; and it is tied, and all vomits large amounts of pus, and this is for the health of the patient, and the ancients have put in great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	If it is said that it is necessary to administer foods that inflame the stomach, by pinching the breast.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that the apothecary does not have it, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, if it is the right one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of them say that they put wind on the joint, for sweetening, and it seems right; however, doubt and I know that the wind does not bring superfluities to the joint because of the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them say that they should cover the joint with fine oil and put tents between the ribs to measure the hour correctly, then care for the care of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure through the bone that points through the tissue, and doubt arises in the patient, then it is necessary to cut through the shoulder blade that is broken, and to put on an instrument to hold the face; therefore, it is necessary to split the bone, and to thread it lightly, and then to cut the edges of the wound if they are large, and to cure them with plasters as long as they are healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If the patient has a stitch come out, then put on soft oiled cloths on the wound, and hold it; and cure while the wound is coming out, and make sure the knots are not tight on the costal bone as much as possible, until it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes to fracture of the shoulder bones, and rarely does it happen; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it comes to none, and you see if it will be healthy or not, if you see its hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you touch them with a needle, if it does not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Deadly are those who are mortally injured, and if they do not move and feel well when extracted and not, deadly are the joint of the bone saved, and the patient will be treated, if we put it in treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	When something comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of your bones, and the accidents that are in hands, and if the back jumps with ventosity and evacuation with will; and when it is hurt and placed in the belly, it jumps with ventosity and evacuation with will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is hurt on the back and you see that it is swelling, if it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Wounds that are mortal: if they do not labor in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that if you reward it when it has an abscess, if you put on the oil of rose or olive oil of urine, as soon as it is calmed; then put on a comfortable one and dried bandage, and tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep more than that part of the body where it feels the pain, as long as it is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bones break, then cover the wound; and put on the bone, then assemble the lips of the wound as large as possible in a stitch, then dress the ointment with char, as long as it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone", take your left hand purse, and put it at the other hand of your mouth, then put on the bandage and tie it evenly; then draw, and if it has broken bones, then put on, and if it has rebroken bones, then put on, and cure the wound as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the hip bone is broken, and if it is, then there has been no prior injury to the head; it becomes long and slanted towards the neck, and pain occurs in the lower back, at the base of the spine, and the broken part swells.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if you extend your hand over it while being over the fracture site, and examine the break and its appearance; and if the break is only at the head, then place it in natural position as much as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or slopes towards the neck, then lift the patient's abdomen while the surgeon performs the reduction, as much as possible for the restoration of this break to be successful.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed it evenly, then place the splint, and then place a piece of flax or wool, and tighten the bandage as much as possible, so that the joint does not move; and use the leather on the ribs, as long as the color is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side with a healthy ribcage.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess forms and comes out, if it is not painful, as long as the abscess is not painful, then put on what we have mentioned before; and then return to restoration, and tighten as much as possible, if there are no other complications; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is the bone that lies between the neck and the shoulder blade of the arm, and if it is dislocated, then it must be restored according to one of the following two methods:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And set the two heads of the shoulder bone in their place, and pull them up, and apply pressure to the patient's shoulder; then the dislocated part of the arm is placed on the chest, as it comes to the side, and has a hook of chestbone, then can be extended without any heavy thing or the minister extends it; then put the brace in its place in both hands, as it returns when it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is if one forces the patient to hold his breath, and holds his hand on his collarbone, then commands the ministers to mark on each of the areas where the braces are on his hands, and marks the others without any resistance, and extends each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then force the braces against the resistance, and if the resistance is overcome, and the resistance is overcome, and extend each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the brace is pressed against the shoulder, then it is necessary to set the elbow in the hollow of the arm, and the other towards the forearm, so that the brace is even with the shoulder, and the forearm; then straighten the brace as possible, and hold steady, until the brace is even with the shoulder and the forearm; then set the brace, as it can be, and hold steady, until there is no pain.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	1. And if the patient cries out and comes, if it is not strained for more than seven days, and put on with fine cloth and ointment, as long as the patient cries out; then it is strained, and the manner of straining if you place the plaster on the wound, then assemble the arm with the aid, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the neck; and put the bandage, and strain with the aid and with the arm, if the arm is in its place, nothing hinders it, or if the patient does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, then use these and put the cut on a wider and stronger spike than the others, and have one between each spike, and make each one as large as it passes through the break III times of each part; then tighten the spikes, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving them away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the seat of the spikes and the thickening, as we have said, in the part where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess, if it leaves the ligature for a week, as we have said; then watch every third day the link that does not swell or come to the head because the norrissemens do not come to the member due to it being too loose.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, it is only after three days or more, and the patient lies down on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and put the help in place with plain linen evenly, and look at every hour of the day or night, when the broken bone does not move, or is not softened by the ligaments; if it is due to the power of medicine, and the meat that we have before us, in such a way that the meat is subtle; and when it comes to be taken back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the helper and the leg are returned in 40 days or more; therefore, they should be wrapped and given baths and remedies for the joints to strengthen the limb.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is thick and tight, it should be undone every few days or up to two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the arm fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus" and the "ulna," where one is shorter and the other is longer; and they are connected by the elbow; by chance, only one of the long bones breaks, or the short one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the little bones are broken, the restorations are light, and the cures; and when the great ones are broken, if it is a poor cure, and more wounded than when they were broken separately.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the little bones that are broken, then it will be necessary to lightly extend and put equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great bones, then it will be necessary to strain more strongly; and extend it over the little finger, and raise the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the feet lower, and let the malice be on itself, and the little finger higher, so that the malice suffers no labor; then extend the other arms to the part opposite the hand, or to the elbow, and some other arms to the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts it in its place, according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, then he puts each piece in its place, and if there are no loose teeth that point towards the knee, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, this is a serious matter.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken to the individual surgeon; if he takes care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration there arise postoperative swelling, if the dressing made of olive oil and lead-based wax is not too hard or too soft, but subtle, until the swelling is pacified.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then take the ointment, and put the powder of the mill with a lot of urine on it, then put the sticks, and let the wreath be larger than the others; and see if there are VI sticks or arms in more positions: whether the wreath is in one of the bones, or in two; and draw it more under the wreath than elsewhere, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the moisture that is under the wreath be soft and not hard or sharp; and let the strings, which are drawn out, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after some years.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accidents come to the member, if it is like itching to the member, then you must apply hot water to the member as long as the itching is relieved; and let the member rest in peace.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then the inflammation resumes, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones are broken, it seems like something, if it is addressed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the wounds cannot come to the member because it is too tight, because it is too tight, then you must loosen it in a short time, and let it rest for some years, until the wounds are healed, and then the member will be stretched.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things come to the patient in XX years, it is not good.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the dislocation is not reduced, then the patient can move their hands to their collarbone, and it should be even, and they should be still and quiet, and sleep on their back; and it is hoped that this reduction is restored in XXX years or XXXV, and by chance in XX years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the wrist dislocation
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Wishes that on the back of the hand and in the two wrists there are few dislocations, and only twisting many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	1. And when the plant of the hand is broken or twisted, if it is found that the patient's hand has a correct angle, and it stands straight in front of him; then he places his hand on the extended nail, extends the fingers of the broken bones, and puts them evenly in the holes, as long as they are well joined; then he applies plaster and stitches, if necessary, then he puts an elephant on according to the quantity of the nail; and it is wrapped in a gutter of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	1. And if the fracture is at the sides of the belly of the plant, then make a gauze ball, and instruct the patient to stretch it on his broken plant; then stretch from a long gauze, and it should be as large as the plant of the hand, and it is stretched, if it can be done.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the elbow, then it comes that you place an splint on, and another on the plant, if the hand is over and straight, then the arm is fully tightened, and the line between the two is stretched.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not come to either of us, if it is bent, then if it is held straight, as it should; and the tightened with the plant, and if you see that a splint is placed right and small on the wrist to lift the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is in other parts, such as the index finger or one of the others, if it is held straight, and the other is held with the healthy finger that follows; or you hold them all together, as much as possible, or you place a splint on it, as it should; and be careful in the restoration and the disposition of the wound, and what comes, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken vessel
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the vessel is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; the restoration is if the ligaments that support the fracture are tightened and the other one is loosened.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient suffers from pain in their face, then each part extends its ligaments according to its own, and it is when the fracture is complete.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the vessel, then some of the ligaments are pulled towards the point of pain, and the others are loosened at the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And as it has reached the bone, and therefore the bone's length, and the bone's extension; then place the bones equal with your two hands, according to its natural figure, and then place the template, and the bone, and if it does not move, it is correct.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it does not move, let it rest for a while and return to your care and the cure; the wound is made in part.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the wound with a bandage doubled in width of II or III, and remove any excess, then bend the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the nail, and put the long piece between the thigh and the leg, leaving the knee bare; then bend the leg and the thigh again with the bandage, and put on the bandage again, and place an estile on the bone of the leg; then put leather between the leg and the thigh to fix the string, then start to tie for form III or IV on the bandage; and as you add more layers of the bandage, the less it is tightened; then take out the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and in the three estiles that are fastened, then return to the knee of the thread, until you see the pit; the string, if it does not move from its place, then let it alone, then leave it, then it will not move anymore, neither apostheme nor enfleure.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it leaves, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, if they can be found, then it is possible; and if not, then it may be necessary to cut the limb and drain it; and the cure, as we have said, depending on how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never has the hip been broken otherwise than when one sets it in place, as we have seen in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration that has been made, it does not clash with the patient's pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you advise that the hip is restored in a short time, or at least a little more, according to the differences in complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the right knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the right knee joint there are few breaks, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, whether it is only a fracture or a puncture, and comes to all wounds, and feels pain, and that is not good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put back in place whatever has been dislocated as much as possible, and then put on the plaster, and if you have a roller, and roll it around, as you can, then tighten as you should, then reward all the positions we have said for other dislocations, such as the popliteal fissure and other similar ones; if you put on the plaster for each accident as much as is possible, then it should be healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, and some are called by right "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and all fractures are similar to those of the arm, and for this it is the restoration as well as the arm properly, and the parts are all. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, then feel great pain and see that it is well; then turn slowly.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	The patient must extend the limb and hold it evenly; however, it is important to note that if the fracture is crooked, and there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and the alignment according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, if you take two strips of wool threads that are purple and run along the leg on both sides, and are long enough to cover the leg from the groin to the ankle, then wrap them around the leg and tie it tightly, and at this point do not let the leg sway to the right or left, and it is well; and no one increases the pain of the leg, and it is made of flax, and I put it on the leg to watch for movement, and properly made it in the fracture or wound; and shake each leg every day to see if there is any swelling or other accident; if the cure is as soon as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones of the shoulder
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the shoulder never break and must be very hard, and they have only been broken in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the shoulder are broken and you see the bones sliding over each other, if you put them on the ground as hard as possible, just like when you are flying, then put your hand on the shoulder and lift the bones as much as they can; then press them until they return to their place; then put the splint and stitch it, and put a small pillow under the chest of the shoulder, then draw it towards the shoulder joint, then wrap the rest of the clothes around it, and other things that you have skill for.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, you will find the bones uneven, broken, and dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are two breaks, if they heal, as we have said, the hand must be set; then put a splint on the other end according to the length of the bone; and make a pad for the joint that I have mentioned, and make it wider; and if there are two or three, or more, breaks, if you put one on each end according to its quantity, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and tighten the joint around the padding; and let the hand be placed so that the elbow is over the stomach of the joint, so that it is well tanned.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	It is necessary that you do not ignore the other things I have said for other fractures, as soon as we have said them; and treat each accident in the same way that is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone break of the shoulder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the woman's shoulder bone is broken, if it is made to fit, then it inclines towards the part of the shoulder, and is held by the hand; then fill the nature of the maim with cloth, and put it in as much as it can hold; then lift the woman, and gently bend the shoulder a little at a time, until the cloth comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the cloth; and if she sees blood, if the cloth is soaked, and if she has been soaked, put it back on, and in seven days or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see it, take a bowl of water, and tie a string around the hole, and blow all the water into the nature; then suck out of the string, until the bowl is empty: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it alone for several days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the elbow is broken, or of the female, if it is repaired as we have said in the elbow of the horse; and these fractures are not hidden that are near to him who sets his study and his use, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in more ways the right direction of the restoration: understand the doubts.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the joint, when it is broken, take an ostrich's beak and bite the joint; then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, as the bone of the shoulder or elbow, or seeming, that it be healthy now, if that wounds which we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is, if the cauterization of vitrol, if you have nothing else, then resume to restore the fracture in the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the cauterization is done and the patient comes, if you leave the restoration for the next day, as long as the cauterization is calmed, and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will make the patient come to accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks, it is exposed on the side of the knee discovered, so it comes that you put it lightly in your hands, at a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent for you to put it evenly in your hands, then the splint that is of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this, it is a matter of practice that he pierces three or four, according to how many there are in each case of setting the fracture; and it should be thin and a large one, which does not crush the compression on the member of your hand, and it should also be in front, and a large one in front, in this way:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	The term "palainche" refers to a type of bandage or dressing used in medieval medicine. The text states that it is used when the headbones (cranial bones) need to be set, and the bone ends are aligned so that they fit together like a puzzle piece. Once the bone ends are properly aligned, the dressing is applied, and the patient is left to rest until the bone heals.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	If the fracture is subtle, and the fragments cannot be easily grasped by the bone, it is necessary to apply pressure to the head of the bone, as soon as the fragments have some mobility. This helps to reduce the risk of further injury and promotes healing.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	If you are unable to realign the bone, as we have previously advised, if it is held by an instrument suitable for this purpose, either a forceps or a knife, or a hook, then you must remove it from the bone as quickly as possible. This should be done with gentle pressure and minimal trauma to the surrounding tissues.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, you should suspect that something is not right in its natural state.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you keep it in its natural state, and then apply a thin layer of black, unscented linseed oil, and properly do this; and do not put anything on the wound or other places where there is oil, so as not to cause rotting and corruption; then administer ointments as you restore the bone, and leave the wound exposed, covering it completely according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound does not become tight with the fracture; and many times have I seen this cause the patient's health to deteriorate, and have caused death or corrosion in no time; and the scars are softer and less yellow than those of other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	When the wound is large or severe, and you doubt that it will heal, as we have said, and you feel pain in the leg, but cannot put on bandages; then wrap the leg with cloth, make tight bandages, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound has become infected, and if all that you have applied has not helped to heal the wound, and if you use antiseptic remedies for painful wounds, as we have used in the past.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary that you unwrap the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb is aligned in a certain way that the belly corresponds to the leg lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to thrust, and it cannot be held but only moved away from the belly, with small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and all these pieces damaged that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if an abscess comes to the skin, or in some other way of corruption, and it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed through the skin, as in the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if it is not treated, because often death comes, but it is left until it perishes; by chance it may heal after 20 or 30 years, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of thorns that come out of the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come often after the health of the incision, in fact when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the member; and by chance cannot make the limbs their natural size.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the wound is fresh: if it is treated with stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and other similar things, if you take none of these things or all together, and mix them with warm stiptic wine or with an abundance of urine or with vinegar; and then apply them to the wound in poultices, and draw it well out of the hands; and then withdraw it, and repeat another one, as long as the necrotic tissue is sound; or you pull out a well-made piece of plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it all cures the swellings in the members; and if the necrosis is already converted into firmness, and is like a piere, and it is easy to the bone, if the gauze is changed, and the superfluity is cut off; or you leave it without any raser, as long as it is sound, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak limb after imprisonment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed and recovered, and subsides after the weak limbs and gently, if for any reason it comes from: of one it comes because it was cut too narrowly, and was not as it should have been; or because it received too many screws, and could not come to the member; or for a multitude of arthritis; or for too great movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its chest, and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure if you make the patient drink honey and make the chest tense as much as possible without multiplying in it; and give him a bath, and he then becomes happy and calm; then put vinegar on the limb, if the swelling increases at great norrisment, and the arthritis often decreases, until the swelling corresponds to the member; and then return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The dislocated limb after the healing process.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is swollen after restoration, and the bone is openly broken, and the shape of the dislocated limb is deformed, it is not in its natural state: if one does not believe the fools who say that one must break the bone entirely, and all others have done this in our land; and these injuries are blamed, and great harm comes of it, and by chance the death occurs, however, if the wounds and tortures are fresh, and if they are washed with hot water or herbs that are mollifying are cooked, as cold compresses or roots, and such things; and I apply a mollifying ointment, as well made, and I take the mucilage of vismilk, and cook it with melted lard or olive oil, and apply it on; or I take fat figs and chew them with cinnamon, and such medicines that dry the sweat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is there where the node does not continue and long to touch with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, as well as the incision, and it needs to be healed with iron, then let it be coated with copper if it can reach the bone, through a subtle and light subtraction; and study and practice in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sensation to the target.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay, if it is not seen, and by chance if it is reset on the shoulder; because it cannot be moved to the ear where it is inflamed: many times come spasm and other pains; always, when this happens, I make the patient healthier, then leave it, as long as the feverish inflammation is calmed; then warm and oily oil is applied to the limb, then it is gently reset, and each member is cured as it was cured in its shoulder.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the surgeons for the dislocations of the shoulder joints.
des mandibules	for the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are cases where the mandibles are dislocated, and the dislocations of the jaws are in two ways: either they are a small piece of their bones, and become softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang downwards, and cut off the saliva from the mouth that cannot hold it, and cannot close the mouth, and envelops the tongue with the word.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through more positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	1. If it is complete and accomplished, if you reset it immediately and do not move it; in such a way that the surgeon marks the patient's head with the tool, and cuts one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which is the lower jaw, where the dislocation is located; and the other two hands are deflected, to make them equal; and instruct the patient to smooth and move all of them.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	2. And the teeth are placed in their place, as they should be in his jaw.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	3. If the jaw is reset, it should be done gently, that is, the lower and upper jaws together, as long as the teeth are not moved too much; and do not move them excessively, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned correctly, the patient's mouth feels well, then put soft cloths on it made of olive oil and wax, then lightly tie them with strings; let the patient sleep on his back, and his head between two pillows, so that he does not move to the left or right, nor strain himself, but gently feed him with meat as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jawbones; then remove what he saw lightly, and do not try to open his mouth with his fingers and drink, as long as the jawbone is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two lower jaws cannot be realigned at once and are not converted to their original position, and if fever and customary aches come, and by chance the stomach is affected, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, you will know that it is disastrous; and many have died in the past, in nine years.
de la forcelle	of force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be overcome with the cost of continued use, and it is never stable at the end, and it is well known that it is so.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is when the patient bends at the waist and extends his arms; then press on the shoulder with your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and the bandage, and tighten them; and the part that is towards the shoulder cannot be realigned, but if it does not come back, then reset it at the shoulder as we have said, and then place the splint and the bandage, and tighten them, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy; and then again, bring the head of the dislocation back to its original position when the limb is released from the shoulder.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways the shoulder can dislocate: either it dislocates at the shoulder blade area; or at the hip area; or at the elbow area, and that happens rarely; or it does not dislocate at all, but rather at the shoulder; and this happens more often in those with less strength, because they jump farther; in those with more strength, they jump a little, and then return.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men may experience trauma or fracture, and the shoulder is dislocated from an abscess, and make sure it is reset by this means.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when turned towards the axis, and there is a difference between the affected spine and the healthy one; you will find this difference manifestly; you will find at the head of the shoulder a hole, and then at the top of the shoulder the head of the shoulder, as if it were an "O"; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his side, nor move without any movement; and if it is dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you can see it clearly at the top; and this way of dislocation is not easy to return, when it is new, or if the patient is a child.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the physician gently places his hand on the shoulder of the patient, then places his thumb under the acetabulum, and gently presses on the joint with his fingers at the top of the thigh; he then releases his hand and extends it upwards, placing it beside the patient; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands a short time after, then it is that the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the physician applies an ointment softening and soothing, as a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in hot water, and is applied; then he soothes the patient on his back, and places one hand on the acetabulum at its lowest point, neither too soft nor too hard, then places the foot of the patient's leg on the hand, and gently presses the shoulder muscle, and traces the physician's hand; and other physicians trace the shoulder muscle if it does not move; this shoulder now returns, and you see if you follow this manner: and it is that you cause the present home to be larger than the shoulder; and it should be turned towards the chest, and should be placed on the shoulder of the physician, and gently lifted up, so that the shoulder hangs in the armpit; and other physicians trace the physician's hand from the shoulder towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, if it can with nothing heavy to do with it, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reduction is also done in another way: and it is like this: take the long pin in the earth, of which the heads are also returned as the pistal, and not too big nor too rude; then place it on the patient's shoulder, but if it has been bent too much, and the shoulder is too long, then extend your hand from another part, and the joint returns to its place immediately; and if it does not return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take the pin of two forearms of large and medium size, which has the head entered from the front of the shoulder according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the nail that it was not bent by the surgeon, then put it in the hole of the nail; and extend some of the arms over the long nail, and the helper over the shoulder, and the arm at the wrist of another, then put the arm on the handle of an arrow, and stretch the hands apart from each other, and let the chest hang down from the other side: the joint was now fixed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in whatever way that may be, if you put the hole a linen thread even, then put the plaster of powdered flour with incense and urine on all the shoulder blade and ribs, then draw the nail through the hole again, and turn the line on the plaster, and bandage the hand on its collar, and the hand will remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drinks little at first, until the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; then gradually drink more after the first seven or eight days, and move it; and if it is tight and does not become soft, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is tight due to moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three pulsations, as it is placed before or in the chapter of cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven weeks, the joint does not hold and cannot raise the arm forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened; and suspect that the joint will never fit in its socket.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the knees, or thighs, if it is made by force, and extension of hands, and it is managed another hour; and it is cured as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	2. And if after the cure there comes pain in the member, and later movement, if it uses the patient's bath many times, as long as that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	3. of the dislocation that costs
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	4. The joint that is costly is dislocated many times and returns; and it is dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well repositioned because it is seen clearly and felt clearly; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sharp edge with your hand, if you see it open wide.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is weak, and cannot hold the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it every time you dislocate, because if you do not reset it quickly, it will be difficult to return at all, even when it is in its place; rather than other dislocations, which are more painful and can lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is possible when it is in its place, as soon as you can return it; then extend your hand to your two hands; and your arms should be expanded, and your hands should be directed according to the course of the cut, from outside to inside, and bind the joint with your fingers or at the root of your palm, as soon as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If the dislocation is forward, then it returns when it doubles its hand on its hand, and it is proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not return to the shoulder, then it is treated with strong extension; and if two hands extend the arm, and hold it with two hands, so that it does not move at the extension, then turn the arm in each part, then wrap a double long and wide cloth around it; and when the patient touches the joint with his finger, if there is no oil to lubricate the joint, then form the joint with grease; and when it returns to the shoulder, if it is covered with dry powder with cow dung, and forms the arm at the shoulder, and leaves some fingers, then let it go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly closed in its place, and it does not move, and you see that the joint does not tighten well, then repeat the application and the joint, and leave it for some time until it is firmly fixed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels gripe after the displacement of the joint, and it becomes still, if he bathes and rubs well, and presses until it is assuaged; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's wool dressing, then leave it for one night and one day, then the bone, and let it enter or bath; and when it comes out, rub the joint firmly, then put the wool dressing back on, and then enter or bath; and twice or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see, if you put on fat sheep's wool moistened with butter, and press it; if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The first sentence to translate is "li dislocation de la main".
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The second sentence to translate is "Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’elle est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	When you place the forced hand on a table, extend the fingers, and make sure they are even. If you want to check if it is well placed, look at the appearance of the joint; when it starts to swell, it is necessary that you observe if it is well placed; then place the force hand on the back of your hand on a table with extension and flexion.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the forced hand on the table with your hand facing down, and look to see if the hand is aligned with the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. If not, if the strain of emplasstres apostemes does not relieve pain, and you leave it alone, you can try to restart.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in the arm after some time, if the joint becomes torn; and do not doubt the surgeon that as long as the hands are not relaxed, nothing can be held up: therefore, know that the nerves are affected, or the artery; if there is no other engine but to stretch by fire cautery, and by chance it does not work otherwise.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in the arm, if you put on the splint that we have described, then stretch and leave it for some time, then remove it and leave it alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be well moved, and there is no swelling, if the heat of the hot mustard, and the rub as much as it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	1. No time has the thumb been loosened from any part, no time on the back of the hand or stomach; therefore, it is loosened, and the dislocation is reduced in your pockets as it returns, then hold the chief of the loosened thumb, and lead it to the part where it was dislocated; and leave it there, and then put it back in place; and from there, as we have said, and from the other joint, and make it move, and re-tie it; and do this often, as soon as it is wide, and thus do it, if it is loosened on the stomach of the hand, and do it as we have done before, as soon as it is safe; and thus do it, when it is loosened from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the shoulder joint
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joint of the back or side is dislocated, and there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, because the patient dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And if the signs are that the patient jumps and cannot hold on, and many times the body parts are softened, or the thighs or arms or elbows, or the shoulder joint is dislocated many times; the one who is silent at the back is called "glibosity": the cure is that you reward if the glibosity has come from childhood: if there is no cure or sanation for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from cutting or percussion or such things, they call the old ways of healing by great words, but it does not bring about much good in all; but I have abbreviated according to my intention and formed bandages in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is no strength or health; and also those that come directly in the second costal arch, and can be cured only if the proper one that comes to the back is extended evenly on his face, and does not cause him pain; then form a bandage at the chest on the earth, and the other as pieceshapes, and a line through the mosquitoes, and the other as hinges, and as knuckles; and two ministers tie the bands, one at the chest and the others as pieceshapes among the two spines; and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the mosquito puts his hands on the spike forms, as it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, take a table of three fingers of the long arm, cut off the nail, and the patient should be on the side, then put the handle of the table on the spike; and put the mirrors of the handle on the other handle of the table, and press well until it returns to the elbow; and if you see, do the same for the thumb that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is it that you have two ties at the wrist of one arm, and turn the mirrors to two others, and there should be a thumb of long nail between each tie, cut off and cut out, a thumbful of spike; and there should be a knot in each tie, or the thumb turns, and they should be firmly held in the earth, if they do not move; and between each two ties there should be a knot turning, even with the knees turning, and there should be two knots of long nails to turn the thumb; and then lie the line that is between the elbows at the wrist of the thumb, and the other line towards the fingers of the other thumb, and each of the ministers turns its thumb at all the line, and the masters put the spike even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When the dislocation is equalized, it should be dried with a desiccant powder and then the wounds should be cleaned, followed by applying a tablet of III doses of gilbertite and the healthy part of the spine, then tied with a string as we have said, and subtle nerve medicines should be used until it is cured; and nothing should come after the healing, if it is necessary to administer lubricating and softening medicines with the tablet we have mentioned before; and never once should a piece of plaster be given, and never once should there be an appearance at the back of the spine that is curved, and one should make sure that this is not a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one does not have to fear having too much confidence: by chance, one might come to death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the elbow
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The elbow joints are only dislocations, and no others; the elbow joint is dislocated in four parts: back and front, above and below; and more back, and less below.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation is that when the bad leg is joint with the good one, it is longer, and the gap between the bones is greater in the bad leg than in the good one, and it cannot double its gait at the fire; and it is the one who is lame due to the abscess, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the burn, if it is that this accident is against these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who comes to the front, if it is that his leg is well according to the completion; however, do not double the genital with pain, and if you see him move, if he cannot before, and retains his urine, and wipes his anus, and when he goes, if it passes under the sole.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who comes to the rear, if it is that he cannot expand his genital, and double, and that this leg is more tense than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is raised on the costals.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The first line of the text is translated as: "If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, there are four ways of dislocation: if you manage to return the joint, and it becomes stiff and deformed, and the limb is twisted and turned; by chance if it returns, and there is no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then it may be necessary to use a strong minister and stretch the leg with two hands or one arm; and other ministers extend their hand in this manner that they push their hands out of their belts, then they stretch the thigh along the bone; and others tie the head of the thigh; and they extend forward and backward once, as long as the patient is lifted off the ground once and does not droop.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is so common as to have four similar appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then it is necessary to treat the appearance If the dislocation occurs in the jaw, then it is necessary to tie the patient's shoulder on its healthy side, then tie the bandage on the root of the tongue, and the other limb that is loose, then tie the bandage up towards the angle and towards the force; then tie a few more servants' hands, and embrace the largest limb of the malpositioned shoulder, and extend it according to its form: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is gentler than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	1. If you do not hold the dislocated shoulder in this manner that we have described, then it comes to pass that you feel the two feet of the patient's leg together with a strong tension at the two ankles, and at the two knees; and the injured leg is extended twice as much as the other. Then it is hung from the head of a stake, and is suspended from the earth with two arms. Then command the minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and have other ministers hanging with the patient, who embrace form the thigh, because the joint now returns painlessly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	2. If the dislocation is in its proper place, and if it is as we have described in the case of the patient with a gilbositeit, and draws the ligaments on the injured leg properly and also the ankle; then tie the ties, the head and the other at the foot, then place the ties between the thighs of the patient in the form of the dislocation; and cover the damp cloths with it so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and he puts them evenly in his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	Otherwise, place the heated object as we have described in the previous passage, and press it on the affected area as we have advised the physician.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the affected limb as we have described, and according to what I have said; then place your thumb on the pain of the joint, and press with the other hand, and stretch it towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, and it cannot be extended by the affected limb as we have described, do not lift it from the ground, but let it be as it was when it was dislocated at the back; place it on your face, and extend it as we have said before, and it must press on the joint at the table; and it will be enough when the limb is extended, and they will be equal; then bend the knees, and put the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, if the limb does not move; and lie down for three or four hours, then remove the plaster, and see if they are equal, if the bandage, as we have said before, and leave them alone until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should be bent and pulled back, and not in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign that you command the patient to bend their knee towards their thigh, and if it does not move towards their thigh, then they are dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient lie straight, and extend their leg if possible, and put your back on their knee, and place your hand on their chest; then grasp the dislocated shoulder with your hands, and extend between your two fingers, and bend the two bones of the dislocated shoulder; and other means extend the leg as much as the shoulder returns to its place, and the signs are that it has been gently placed in the thigh; then apply plaster, and make the leg airtight at the thigh, and assemble the fingers strongly three or four times, then remove the bandage; and do not force the patient to move their limb until they are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not extended, if proper extension is given, as we have said in the treatment of the sprain, until it is healthy again.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never fully dislocated, and it is often twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that if the ankle is dislocated, and it is before the part where it is dislocated: the relocation is lighter, and it should be extended lightly with the hands when it is only weak.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, if it is before the part where it is dislocated: the relocation is lighter, and it should be extended lightly with the hands when it is only weak. Then, if it is completely dislocated, you must seat the ankle right, and hold it with your hand on the leg, tugging on the foot; then, take the patella to your right hand, and then to your left, and lift it up, and hold it well at the top; and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and lifting the patella twice; and if it returns, it is well; if not, if it does not return, continue the extension, because it will return; and if it still does not return, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and hold the knee firmly on the ground between the thighs, and let the patella drape over; then, mark the position of the patella with your hand, and other members extend the patella to their hands or to the patient's leg at the top of the patella; then extend each member equally, and the knee will be held between the patella and the patella; then place the dislocation in your hands, and mark the healthy leg on the opposite side, and the dislocation will return instantly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it reaches its point, if it is covered with plaster and allowed to dry, and forms again, and the patient places the leg on the thigh, and covers the nerves that are under the ankle joint, so that the ligaments do not become too tight; then it is left alone for II or III days, and if the ligaments loosen, it is allowed to move; then it is re-dressed at the end of the fourth or fifth day, and if the patient does not return before this, it is considered a success.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms and comes out, it is necessary that you open it, as we have said elsewhere, as soon as it is healthy.
des dois	Of two things, one is that the
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they can be extended well with effort, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are not in any way difficult to reduce, then you should try to put the shoulder on the table or on .ie. table totally straight, and place your foot on what is opened by these joints, then press with your foot on this, as it reheals; and when it is equalized, if there is no opening, then place a table at the head of the shoulder, then form the heel, and let it stay for three days, then remove it; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wound and dislocation occur together, and it is seen that the wound is being restored, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your cure, whether you are skilled in the art and have not used it long, or whether you are pitiful and merciful and slow, do not be presumptuous; and begin with soothing apoplexy chaut, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to the shoulder, unless the apoplexy chaut moves; and when the limb is at the shoulder, if it is painful, soothe it with gentle applications and cure the wound, as needed, with desiccants; and if there is a fracture with the dislocation, and the bones are broken, if the bones, and do as we have said in simple diseases; and do not enter into a path of despair, according to what we have said, for this is according to your creator's will, and for the wisdom of your heart.
Amen	I understand your request and will
