O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three heads of the son, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fulfillment of it, and have finished for its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I have seen come to me in vision that I have completed this with this cauterization, which is from the work of hands, it is to know "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is disfigured in every way, if it is perceived by the science and obscure, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and emptiness, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems that I believe that I could revive it by putting the arrangement of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation together.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and come together the forms of the firebrand cauteries and other tools of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as he is skilled.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of parts, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and limbs and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the legs, and also of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Ypocras says that with the non it is not made, and with the work it is few.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that those who are not known of things before said, if it is made that he does not err and does not mislead the men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	1. If I have wanted many times of these who become involved in this science and if they abandon this science and senselessness.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	1. For I see a man who has his head covered with scabs or the neck of a woman, and covers the arteries of the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	1. because so much blood is lost that the woman dies in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	1. And see another man who treats a wound of an old man, and the wound was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	1. If he carried with him a piece of the bladder, and he died the third hour.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have already been accused of the practice, and see the position of the patient and the size of the piercing, and if it was well that it was cut, then it died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And see if another man who had been in our kingdom who had broken his leg, and with the fracture there was a wound.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the men of ignorance were restrained from the fracture on the wound, which was done in short time, and did not leave any pain in the wound, and it was finished.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and the command that it does not slip away.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and waited until the leg was completely frozen and the foot, it came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called for to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	When I dislocate it, if it is not in the body and does not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all paths to cure the corrupt or injured member were already known, but it was not effective.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption did not stop until the member was completely wasted and the member was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another wonder that will fall and enchantment, and then inflame by the evil of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is free of melancholic matter, only then does it happen that if one touches it with iron, it will not be able to do anything else than what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, unskilled children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts.
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	It is to know, coward or there is more danger in other positions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I will show in every joint of this book where there is danger and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For if you do not keep them well, then they will not be able to speak well of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your weapons in good order, and handle your patients lightly but firmly, and use the best way possible if by God's grace you come to health and be well.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the unwholesome diseases of sorrow be healed.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and keep your weapons in good order, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen's admonitions are not without fault.
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take medicine for a serious illness unless you are called by a wise man.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have seen this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medical cauterization, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of stitches, and of the materials for cauterization, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and pricking, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered and the forms of stitches.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is for restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered according to the loosened joints and the shapes of the muscles.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, if we remember the work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the help and not every complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of help, and not harm, is the longest speech and the most subtle science and the secret remedy.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and they said more of the sausages, and they agreed to this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and they say less of their words, because I question their age.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterization helps universally to all complexions or matter, for it is the complexion.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is to know the complexion of heat and the complexion of dryness.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In heat and dryness, combined with matter, they devise no and say that the cauterization is large aid.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other says the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cauterization is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of hot fire is heat, and it should not be treated with hot disease by heat, nor by dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and those who say the opposite that cauterization gives great aid to hot disease that comes from the courage of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For as soon as you perceive the chest of the patient and its moisture at the complexion of hot fire, you must quickly close the chest.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it at any time by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And all paths, no one interferes as much as he who has experienced it, and knows through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes for their diseases, and their symptoms and the spaciousness of tendons.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Other complexions have no pain, just as in cold and wet diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	The patient should assemble and align with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that the fire cautery assembles when it has secretions of remedies, and even more benefit than the cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the flesh is simple, and only causes harm to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines come from one part of the body to another, by allaying, and bring health to the afflicted parts.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance the patient is found.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	I made this remedy and its goodness for the substance does not lack, if it has no surplus.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I found this in my research through experiment and the length of service and study I have dedicated to this art, and it is true of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And I apologize for the length of my speech, as I only share with you what I have learned and the quality of the work, how it affects the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive them in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	2. And know, son, that the cauteries should be made in such a way that they fit well, and they should be prepared.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is useful in all cases, because the wounds are not always misplaced by the help of cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And likewise, if the cauterization is done for necessary pain and haste that cannot wait for the greatest malice to come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think otherwise, you foolish man, if they do it like this.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	And he says thusly.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But it is not so with those who do it, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and is worthy of medicine for its swift valor, and for its virtue in its work and signory.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And some things are that the disease grows once according to the complexion of the patient and the weakness of the body and its virtue.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not cauterized administered to him or he has little superfluity and moisture, like cauteries of thorns for pain, and similar things, and part of the pain does not return much.
mais ce avient poc.	But this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand this because cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	1. But they only believe that cauterization is useless after medicine, but they understand it is false, and it is cauterization after medicine because when we manage any cures in no disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cauterization, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is well said that cauterization is the end of medicine, not according to the attention of the gullible.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	1. The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are as poisonous as those made of iron, and they did not know that it is because of the quality of the gold and the high nature of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	1. And they said that gold cauterization does not cause any harm, but it is false to see it as such, because I have experienced it and found that it is seen in no man.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And the gold cautery is worth as much as the iron one, if they say so.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And you know that the instrument is made of gold when it is heated by the color of the gold, and has cooled down.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is heated too much.
si font au feu;	If they do on fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and it has enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that's why we use our fire cautery because we have not managed to complete our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter of the lighter bones, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is used for moisture and coldness in the head, and it is done due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the ears, eyes, and jaw, as well as numerous dreams and pain in the throat and chest, and even for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and seizures, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient must be purged by medicine solutive modifying the chief III nuis or IIII, according to which virtue and age and accustomary of the patient he can suffer.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	Then I will cut the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	Then I will set the patient's head between my hands, and place my hands on their shoulders.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After, place the root of your palm on the root of their nail between their two fingers.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And if your two hands come together, it will bleed, so wash the fire cautery which is called "olivare", which is shaped like this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the arm signet of ink, and pull and stretch your hand a little at a time, torn.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then gently loosen your hand element, and you will see the first bone is very small.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, when the cauterization resumes as soon as you see the bone, just like I showed you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after pulling on the thread, and putting on soft cotton, and putting it on the knee, and leaving it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after putting on more soft cotton in the burr.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it until the burn is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the wound with the ointment called "Tetrafarmacone", as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And if they say to the old man, that the more stretched out the wound is, the better it will heal.
et por ce si aide mues.	For this reason, it is helpful to help.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that the fire cautery should be so harsh as to take part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And it is said that one must cauterize as long as possible, and drive it in as hard as possible, because the bone is so large and thin like the vertebrae that women use for the same reason that the humors exit outside.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And one must leave the wound long overstretched.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After, one must cure and soothe it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	These two methods of cauterization seem to me to be the most effective in general, rather than in any man who has no fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And it seems to me that I should leave it alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	Car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	2. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees "cochie", et d'espurgement de chief et d'oiles et d'emplastres.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When you perform the fire cautery as we have described earlier, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	If the patient's disease is very severe and not too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	However, the fire cautery does not work as we have described earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After performing the fire cautery on each of the patient's nails, as we have described earlier, and then perform the fire cautery on the joints called "vasses".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and they are then placed in a vacuum.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and make your hand as smooth as possible if you do not see the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels too much pain in this cauterization compared to others, and I will speak further.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	It is necessary that the cauterization points be more sensitive than those used for circumcision, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When a part of the penis suddenly causes pain, and it spreads throughout the disease, and the patient is purged with medicines modified, and the other cures have been done as I mentioned in the division of diseases, but all of this does not help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore, I perform cauterization in two ways, which is to say, with medicinal fire and with iron:
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The first sentence to translate: "The medical cauterization is used if you have a wound that has not healed for a week, and the edges are black and charred, and then they make a temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the dose of ointment on the leather;".
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is reapplied, if the lip and the eye are tightened and left for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	And then the dressing is removed and the ointment is applied, leaving the wound for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then the wound is covered with a piece of cloth that is dipped in beer as much as possible, until it is saturated.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of inflammation when it is healthy.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that I have written any of these burning medicines or treated with other burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it follows this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of copper, and its form is:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cage or has a small opening, and in its environment it has a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And place it on the painful shoulder, and hold your hand and gently pull the hair a little, as long as you do not feel any pain.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And gently hold your hand that does not burn, that is cold, and there is abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After putting on a piece of cloth made of hemp, and putting the limb in a splint for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I put on a piece of woolen bandage, and then treat the limb with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you return to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare", at all points, and be careful not to cut the artery in this wound that is not yet anchored.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat the wound as we have described in divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before dispensing medicine and hot iron does not benefit it, therefore it is necessary to use the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" as soon as it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And keep your hand steady on the limb that is causing pain, and apply pressure with your hand once, and hold tight so as not to compress the artery and cause it to move away from the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And close the mouth that moves when biting, and the teeth only move when chewing, and apply pressure to the dislocation of the artery when it is compressed, or when it is compressed, there is great pain and at the same time for those who do not know, and who are not studied or experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	And leave the wound in its place.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	1. But I tell you how to remove blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	If you see that this cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the affected area as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned or in the chapter on extracting an artery, with the cauterization instrument that has two cuts.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this cauterization is better than the one we have mentioned and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from being cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from coldness, and it is treated with soluble medicines and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not stop, then shave this cauterization which is called "points", and its form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After stretching the entire ear of the suffering patient, or if the pain is held in the ambitious part, and you draw a small piece from the root of the ear because you have felt the ear lobe swell.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and at each point of each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the shoulder as much as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torment that must be treated by cauterization is those that move due to fleas, as we have said in divisions of the disease.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make cauterization as seems come from scratching and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this appearance of torment that moves due to fleas and excretions of the head and throat, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with the third cauterization.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	A part of it is at the root of the ear, another one is a hole in the temple, and the third one is in the adjustment of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And places the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and makes the cauterization at the tip of the ear, where a hole is made in the earhole, and another one in the temple similarly like a punch;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leaves the cauterization as long as it does not hurt too much, whether on one side or the other;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the appearance of the cauterization that we have shown before, but it is a more delicate hole and it should be a larger one;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the shoulder as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient does not have fever, then I made four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	I examine the two horns of the head, and remove the head, and then I cut off the leg which is called "vaginals" as we have said before, and the shoulder is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	1. The patient should allow their hair to grow
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	In this disease, it is necessary to give the patient years of large doses and modified mental pills.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After the physician has examined the patient thoroughly, and places the scalpel at the occipital region of the emplastre of snail shells, which is written or treated with plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healthy, it will be better;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not healthy, you should do three cauterizations of the head as you descend down the neck, and there should be space between each of the larger ones.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And the treatment is as with the others, and if you see him suffering, and the patient is in pain, you should do one cauterization in a hour.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the rest of the work is, II other at the II corners, and the care as long as it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and if it is the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and with what we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after the head is washed by the physician, then he performs the cautery on the head and at each corner, and the belly and three at the spine.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more skill, and the body is wet and the physician is fainting, and the disease is worse, then perform four cauteries on the spine.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and he lets it as long as the more pain he endures, and hold his hand gently.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure when he is healthy, and that which is called "olive" the cauterization we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	The first sentence to translate is "de l’epilempsie". The
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should not be used for cauterization except by those who are skilled, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is children who cannot endure it, I make a gargle and mastication, often changing the brain with raw meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after he has been in his environment for a while, and I make the cauterization according to what we have mentioned before, and I cauterize on the vein, and on each corner.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is weak and suffers, I make the cauterization as I have said for the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corsets, on the spine of the back and collarbone, and that which is called "olive" according to the way I have mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is ready, I will perform the fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	If the cause of melancholy is the excess or corrupt and fleshy moisture, then the fire cautery should be applied to parts as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the declining superfluity becoming melancholy, and the heart is moist and full, then it should be allowed to drink something according to what the brain is ready for in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the chief of the physician;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making a well-made gauze, so as to wrap it around, if the chief puts it on;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and if the physician believes, and it should be held well by all parts;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the ointment, and it is good to use old honey;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and the physician heats the fire cautery, so that he can drink it and it will not harm;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after removing the gauze from the physician's hand, and it is left cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this once a week with another medicine, as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see it being burned, make multiple holes in it before using the cauterizing tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This is the way to moisten the skull evenly.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then put soft, greased cloth in the burr and on the linen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When hair first comes out of the eyebrows according to the signs I mentioned earlier, then begin and do this: wash the tool with soap and clean it thoroughly, and wash all moist things more than once.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he commands to shave his head, and I make the scalp cauterize, and I cauterize on both temples where the hair ends, or if it ends in one, then;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cover all the cauterization veins and arteries that are exposed due to the hair, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and cover it with a poultice of sand, and if too much blood comes out, if it is too poor for you;
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cauterization that you have mentioned.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never has it been done to cauterize or burn off the two bones of the heel.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the hairs are old and accustomed to be found on the veins, or seen in the appearance of the chief of the hair;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that it is a cold and unwanted growth, therefore I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the descent of the hair;
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize my head, and you cauterize on the two temples, and you cauterize to burn off the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	If it is further refined, if the cauterization is gentle with the scorching of the hair on every small burn.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A tear of tears from the dens of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore, he should drink mild milk;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the head is removed, and I make a cauterization or a gentle olive oil cauterization.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two gentle cauterizations called "clavilis" on the two scars, a little apart from the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and protect yourself from the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then do the cauterization with this cauterization called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	1. If a dislocation occurs due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see how I make the two cauterizations on the two horns as the rabbits are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The first sentence to translate is "dou poil qui point l'oil". The translation is
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	No time has ever come when the hair of the rabbits is converted into wool, and they are shorn, and it is then cauterized according to these methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This is to know by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	Or, the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even.
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in your bed.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After examining the hair, make a figure that is similar to the full thickness, and make a beginning of a sign of the wounds of the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then I put finely ground cotton in the oil of olive and musk, then wash the cauterization with what is here its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have made a few times and it is at the right place, make sure the hairs are in their place.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	The signs of health are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise at the oil point.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then gently hold your hand, and leave it for three days, then put cotton wool on the burn as long as the heat is intense.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the burn once it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same place, as you have done before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are raised, then cauterize as much as the paper is lifted to its natural point, and it should be even, and do not prick the hairs with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medical cauterization is that which you instruct the patient to leave the hair as long and even as possible, then make a piece of cloth in the shape of the iron plate.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then use French soap and live salt, one for each, and mix them well together.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And then apply it as best you can, if it does not cool, then scrape off the shape that you made with the iron plate and put on the paper of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the disease holds in only one ointment, then it is over with one, and it will be cured.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put soft oily powder in the wound's mouth.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the patient's shoulder is in your hand and you place the scalpel on the medicine, and press gently and often, until the shoulder feels bitterness from the medicine, because it feels bitterness as well as heat.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have this done for a long time, if the medicine does not help you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bitterness is passed, if you lift the hand, and see that the paper is raised as well as if it had been raised by tightening with heat or incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then apply more medicine on the hand or if the medicine has not been applied, as long as your application is even, and your eyes are in line;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put fine wool on the wound as much as it is needed, after cleaning the limb with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	If you have the skill to well sharpen your blade for your work with great care, so that it does not cut the medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hair pricks in the oil, then restart the medicine on that limb which has become soft from the proper paper, just as you have done before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment as long as it is healthy;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the doughy pimple:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And these are the shapes that men's members can be large or small, according to your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not reply to the right side to the one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Translation: "Of the cure of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	Translation: "When you treat fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work well, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in the correct position.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And mark the midpoint of the patient's head between your hands in a certain way so that it does not move or change its position.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	After, place woolen lint in the corner of the eye or in the juice of persillon on oil.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heating the fire cautery that is divided:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	And it should be chewed at the head like a quill of a feather, assemble the one that is the fire cautery.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see, if it is appointed for the one to the other, and if you see, if it is as if a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	But this which is your choice is worth more to your will.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula it swells, and in turning the pus, and drying it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and it is closed, if the hand, and turning the belly is stronger;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after putting the fire cautery in place, and holding your hand on the fire cautery at the part where it is not smooth, so that your hands do not go mad;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and puts the cauterization in the grease of the oil, and corrupts it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery before the bone, it would be better.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not work, then reapply the cauterization once more, and if you are skilled enough, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After this, I put on a soft cotton cloth on the wound, and apply the drying ointment as soon as it is clean, and if in four days it is still clean, then I apply an aggressive corrosive medicine as soon as the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and I follow according to what comes in my chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Open the fistula, and cut the leg.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After putting the patient under anesthesia, the subtle form of the operation is performed on them.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make the incision to the depth of a .З. of flesh.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firmly, and do not move the patient at all, until the incisions have healed to their place.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the patient a soft, absorbent cloth, such as a bandage or gauze.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The incisions should be cleaned with soap and water for the health of the patient.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then administer the purging of the belly and return the fistula to its proper place according to what is best for the patient's own belly.
des crevaices en levres	gums in the mouth
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Gums in the mouth sometimes come and are called "hair," and also in the mouths of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these gums as we have described in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then use a small fire cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And it should be placed in those cracks as soon as possible.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the wound is cured, as soon as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When abscess appears in the root of the gallbladder or uterus, or tooth, or roots of teeth, after purging and rubbing and it becomes watery and forms a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit much.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore, you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the bite or rupture of the fistula, and hold your hand as long as the wound does not stop bleeding from it, and if it goes through.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and make sure once or twice to do it, after we have cured what we have said in the cures, as soon as it is healthy.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is cured once or twice, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then you must discover the bone and open the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the knees are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and it does not work, then put the head of the bad doctor in your head.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after shaving the cauterization that was made, in a way similar to putting a collar around the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	The patient is instructed to apply the fire cautery with caution, holding their hand firmly so that the sharp pain at the root of the tooth does not cause discomfort.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After gently releasing your hand, continue the fire cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the patient's mouth with salty water and letting it sit for an hour, rinse it out thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, if the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum is softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried out and becomes dry.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or it is cold, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to try the fire cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and by burning cautery and by fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	If the fire cautery is such that you can ignite wool, and the end in a iron or copper mold.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent stake, and building a flame with wool, and placing the tooth on the hot end and holding until it cools down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And often until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton burn quickly, and place the tooth on fire and hold it as long as the flame reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery is used together with fire if it can ignite a piece of iron or copper, and it should be large enough that the flame does not reach the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cauterization, if it forms thereafter, and places it on the tooth and holds your hand until it is cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, as the pain will be relieved either immediately or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with hot butter in the pressure of this cauterization, and then it will heal.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cauterization according to what you want and according to what you have.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the form of the catheter:
des scrophules	Of scrofuly (a term used to refer to
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are dry and cold, and are not obeying digestion by medicines, therefore wash the fire cautery with soap after it comes out, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the fire cautery on top of the abscess once, or as it comes out from the abscess's opening;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, then put the fire cautery according to the amount of the abscess and leave it on for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and use a soft cloth to apply the cautery as long as the burn is not healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the wound with ointments and bandages as much as possible.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture reaches the cold pores, and at the same time when cold complexion comes, it is necessary that the patient be treated first with soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the burn at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn it too much but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the other burn at the joint of the sharp point of the spine, and it is called "clavicle" in our form.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the joint as we have described when it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the entire
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and disease of the lungs are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever and is not sweating, and it is a chronic disease, then cauterize with the force you wish to use.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and I another cauterize between the two hairs.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and the cauterization called "clavicle" according to the form that was mentioned earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, cauterize by pricking at the entire cauterization called "points" of which the form is before in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the points be such as to hold the joint tightly, or otherwise loosen.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the wound is treated according to the method described above, and if the cauterization is done as follows in this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	Then the cauterizations are lighter because you are doing it with three points.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After which, the patient should have the physician examine his back and chest.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After which, the knot that has been tightened should be loosened with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the dislocation is repeated due to moisture, then the fire cautery that has been used should be washed with this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	And cauterize the knee as much as it penetrates the chest, and the fire cautery will be used in four places.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And this is made with the fire cautery that has three needles, because the form of cauterization consists of six cauterizations.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the third type of cauterization that has:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never has it been adjusted on this wound because it has eight cauters:
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After putting on the cauterization, apply the burn with silk.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after making the patient rest, and do not let the limbs be long until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	If it is dislocated again, something comes out quickly, therefore make a cauterization on the large cauterization clavicle, or on the point of cauterization when pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and it is healed by the moisture and is healthy for the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When the stomach comes with coldness and moisture as it is drawn to its complexion, and the catarrh is multiplied on it, and the usual cures are applied, and it does not benefit, then the patient must have the physician's care on his back, extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	After this, I do three caustics on the thigh, one after another, for the quantity of a dot, at all the cauterization points, and two cauterizations on the costals as much as the cauterizations are at three angles, and they should be spaced apart between them so they are not joined together as they grow sweat;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and be the cauterization if they are not long and thin like a hair, and the shape of the cauterizations should follow this form as closely as possible:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	and if you see cauterization done on a large cauterization on the stomach following this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and the one who feels pain from this cauterization, should cauterize by pricking and holding on to the stomach at the point you see, according to the quantity you see;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then the cauterization should be done to the entire cauterization that is called "points";
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver feels pain from constipation and moisture and large feces, as long as it is not removed from its natural complexion due to excess;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	And the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it will not profit them if they are sewn up on their own will.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	And a sign of encephalitis III is made according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, defeat the epigastriums, either the costal cartilages come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And it is spaced between each cauterization of the growth of a doe.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And let the cauterizations be long on the course and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let the half be only the joints of the knee, and let the patient lie on his side.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	If it cannot be done, then it is best to be cautious, and extend his legs, and loosen his bows.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to, when cauterizing these dull-cut cauterizations, be subtle and gentle in the art, and make sure you do not burn the whole body, because you will dry out the entire corpse.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not return to the mud, because the bones are very delicate in this place, and they do not want to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has come to the liver, and you know whether he is in the true liver or in the wound.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is in pain, he feels the pain is too much.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if he is in a fever, he feels sudden pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this remedy does not help the eyes, it comes to pass that the patient's head is swollen.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	Then cut off the shoulder or the swollen part, and then heat the cauterization which is similar to a tooth, according to what is shown here is the form.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize until the skin is cooked, and then pull out the arrow, as long as the wound is all healed.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of bloods, as long as it is healthy.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	1. And no other cauterization is needed but this one, unless it has been studied by those who have long practiced in the art of medicine, and by their hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it is difficult to overcome, and I seem that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Do not cry, the cauterization will help.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	1. The ancients said that one must make cuts from the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	1. Take a long and dry Aristolochia root, as long as you can find it, and it should be as large and long as your fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	1. And mix it with oil, and then heat it, and cauterize the cut between the strength and the collar, and two small cuts in descending order in the part that is loose where the beard is;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And II burns between the fifth rib and the seventh, descending on a small piece of wood.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and I burn the navel, and I another at the stomach, and I between the second ribs, and it has two points that pierce the cauterization that is between the ribs.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press with your hand, but open it as much as you can smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And no one has ever heard of anyone using a fire cauterization similar to the lancet, and they are shaved and placed between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the incision.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and the pain will flee if it is like we have said in the lancet of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is pain or the patient dies now, or fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse that we have said in the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit much, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you all know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Despite the manner in which it is, if you make III burns or IV, aligning according to the length of the hairs, according to the figure of the bowel-like cauterization we have mentioned before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on all the burn, and let the patient's back be on the ground.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of burning if you wash the burn that has two ends, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and gently cut the hair where the hairs are, or the painful part of the patient comes from the side, and the elevations that you cut on the hair according to the hair, according to the length of the chest, and the burn should be according to the length of the chest.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After the two nerves are inflamed as much as the pain can be felt from the other side, then take the fire cautery, and in it insert the four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, if you cauterize all of the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten phlegm due to long tenacities, and this is the other cure that should be said.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not for dropsy, but in the way that is called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries entor the bowels, and through the stomach, and through the liver, and through the gallbladder, and along the back, through the spine, and at the end, through the pit.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cauterization be close to the edge of the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After letting the cauterization overgrow, let the patient's skin dry thoroughly, and do not reapply the treatment after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And the wound will heal, and the two instructions will be assembled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cauterization on the belly is the clavicle that we have before it to show.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And on the back, it should be olive-colored, according to what is placed before it.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the enflaming of the wounds
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are curved towards the wet one, and are flat like yellow citron, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and gently place your hand with the fire cautery so as not to turn it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in front, otherwise the wound will become infected, and let the cauterization be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After applying two cauteries on each leg at the sharp point of the cuticle;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the longer cauteries be on either side of the genital area in front and the other pointing downwards, on the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries longer so as to cure, that it does not hurt in the end.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vitamins and digestive juices that are in the stomach and intestines are inflamed and cannot be cured by usual cures.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	You see the patient suffering greatly and of great courage, if I perform a good cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or a cauterization on the stomach, the cauterization circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And I perform four cauterizations on the bowel subtly at all the subtle cauterization points, and I perform two cauterizations on the nails.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see many moisture and the patient is suffering, then the fire cautery should be performed on the point where it hurts, and on each side of it, and on the large part of the stomach, because the cure is effective when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of the hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the embolisms are either formed or multiple, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and if I perform cauterizations, it does not profit him.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	I. The physician inserts the spine of the thumb into the wound, which is barely covered by a small amount of dirt and dust, and then performs the fire cautery on the throat with the two-pronged iron.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	II. If you think that the stomach is cold and the meat is not cooked, and the face begins to swell, then you should cauterize the face as it has been said, along with the liver and the gallbladder on all the clavicle.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	III. And leave the cauterization over for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the limb as much as possible.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chalcedony which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	IV. When you cut the gallbladder, if it seems to be too hard, then put it on fire and burn it all while you cut.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand remain so that the fire cautery comes to the birth of the vein, without cutting.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if it does not work, then cauterize again as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of wounds, which are healthy enough.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large fire cautery on the skin, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	A wound that has been improperly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure tightening or opening, we will tell you about it in their own words, if they come to a disease that cannot be healed because of cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If no fistula comes, and it is awake and exudes milk and corrupt moisture, if you prove it to be totally silent, and keep hold of all the tent until it has enough.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	after washing the cauterization tool and the cut that was made, and draw it out of the fistula according to the amount that it tries and is inserted, and continue the cauterization as much as the corset and the crust are burned, once or twice, depending on the amount of the char.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And you are to heal the wound of the beast that is injured, and large wounds.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula is in the course of the uterus and the intestine, and if you heal these wounds, and do not make this further than in the liver, and think that it is not a serious matter.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After curing the liver as much as it is healthy, and if the wound is infected, and the materials are long and tense, then you can be sure that the liver is completely cured.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not long and tense, be sure that the liver is not found, and corroded the bones at the foot.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And as for one of these that we will mention in his neck.
de la maladie des reins	2. of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain in the head comes on, and is accompanied by large ventosity, and no woman can take it, then you must first cauterize the hair on both sides of the head using the cautery iron that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize in a short time, then there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is full and weak from headache and moisture, if the midwife retains the urine, then you must first cauterize in the part where the hair grows on the bladder, either on the left or right side, and each one should be cauterized as we have done with a penis.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	I will perform a fire cautery on the back, or you can do it yourself with care.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and make the fire cautery according to the form mentioned earlier.
de la marris	Of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the mother is cold and wet, and does not allow any part to conceive, and the flow is corrupted and late in its termination.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, it causes great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Therefore, it is necessary to perform the third cauterization at the anus, as we have said, or cauterize the uterus, and then cauterize the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and make the fire cautery according to what we have said.
de la hainche	Of the heel
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the thick moisture descends to the handle of the axe, and for this reason if it does not move with its own weight, then the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the hairs are of the desired department, if you must cauterize the patient on the axe handle at the cautery in the shape of a circle, and before the hair turns around the handle so that the handle is inside the circle; then the handle is inside the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it is the cauterization like those of the stomach that has been cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cauterization is not present, then make three olive oil cauterizations and let the cauterization be like all the hairs.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the cure as long as it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the gallbladder
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the thigh bone, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors with pills of fetid smells, or other bones-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After I have burned him.
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the way of the burn is according to these ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	It is necessary to know how to mix burning medicines and cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	For the fire cautery, it is recommended to have several methods, among which some are as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	That you should cauterize the boil of the hair at the third level using triangular cautery according to this form, and make a deep and large incision, and let there be a space between each cauterization of an inch, and it should be olive oil.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never has cauterization been done on the hair of the head, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, that the cauterization is done with the circle cautery that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the hair.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But I make it in such a way that the circles contain the whole cheek, and all the spots where it may be sore.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And when it comes to the thigh and leg, if the surgeon says the pain is great, then cauterize it with the iron or the surgeon's knife, and there are four cauterizations to be made, one on the side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And if it is the cutaneous cauterization, and the spot is sore.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the surgeon feels that the pain spreads to two or three points or near the wound, then cauterize it at the point where it feels the pain, which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is a skilled person, then I will do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the pain is on the groin side towards the thigh, then it should be cauterized using a sharp or circular cauterizing instrument, and you should take good care of all your cauterizations so that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen others who cauterized on the ankle and caused so much pain that the entire leg became swollen, the foot, and it was noticed and corrupted in all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of belly which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	If the pain is in two parts assembled, make a fire cautery on both sides according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	The wise ones say in the cauterization of the thigh, if it is like this, then I will do it as follows and it should be as big as some giant's finger or a smaller one, and it should be interlaced and should be between each other without leaving any space in between;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the interventions be overseen by two parties, and also like noes, and it should have one main piece of well-made iron.
et c’est li forme:	and it is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And it should be washed as much as it is red and wet, and then placed on the handle of the male medical knife, and it should be turned on the sharp edge.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the fire cautery is used once the cautery is re-ignited and it is left for three years.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a poultice of burrs, and leave the wound open long-term.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cauterization due to its harshness and few people use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And all this is harsh cauterization that they can endure, and either they suffer or not.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	If the medicinal cauterization is that you make I and instrument with sharp points inserted between the cheek and the mouth, and it is either of iron or of copper, a certain length long, and in the upper part has II of us, and between each of them the quantity of growth of a tooth.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be over extended and sutured, and are joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After putting the handle of the comb on the patient's shoulder, gently press your hand on the handle of the comb.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After dipping the comb in the hot water for about an hour, let it dry completely, and the patient will suffer from fever and arsenic poisoning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it is similar to the pain of fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the pain has passed, use your hand with the instrument and gently lift the comb of fire, and leave it for three days, and apply as much bruising as there is blackness in the scar.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it remain for three days before taking a bath
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the aid on the back after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that is shaped according to what you have done in the shoulder;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the way of the hot iron, and I have written or described the correction of medicine;
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	1. Mix alkali and live fire, as much of one as the other, and blend them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	Or if there is a small piercing that can be pointed with a razor and then pulled out;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And put on the other hand and the other, and put on alcali and chalz and soft ointment as much as you have dust from the powders that you will have well prepared in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And he leaves it as is until the wound has stopped bleeding and has begun to scab, then takes all of this, and the grease and alkaline substances like before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And when it will be full of wounds and is maintained in the body's moisture and other cauteries of the members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes the work like fire, and if other medicines are used, such as well-cauterized hamstring with tesisie, anacardi, chalz with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galiens tells us of a remedy that was used to treat the pain of the scalp and sciatica, and he says that this is the only cure, and that it was cured in one session every time this remedy was applied, and he was bathed as instructed after the treatment.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And then in this way that you prescribe to apply green, fresh and dry verdure, and the wound with a little fat, and place on the thigh, knee, and leg where the pain holds, and close it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	When left alone for three hours, the patient will no longer feel the pressure.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then I put him in a bath as much as his chest is raised, and then I let him enter the water, and the pain will leave completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And you should advise that no one should use such a hot cauterization medicine after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	Dyascorides states that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the horn of a he-goat, it can help alleviate the pain.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And it must be made in part manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the gall and grind it with oil, then put it in the flask that is between the little finger and the other which is called the fozen.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking the horn of a he-goat dry, and setting it on fire until it is charred, and then placing it on the hair, and leaving it as long as it remains stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And repeat the process again, and continue doing it as long as you think by touch that it is returning to its place, and that the pain is subsiding.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	The first sentence to translate is: "Et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by touch or percussion or from too great evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, but rather for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after the patient has been given pills or other remedies, which are placed on their back, while the pain remains, three lines of encastrément, and in each line, cauterization or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and it should be made according to the cauterization called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauterizations on the spine according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often occurs in many children, and the signs of the beginning are when they start to close their eyes as they sleep, and suffer.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you should know about the spine on the lower back and how it appears when compared to other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it cured, if the cauterization is done at the fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization penetrates every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the end of the spine by pricking two or three lines, and they are points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the limb is healed according to what we have said, and you are warned that you will not perform a fire cauterization on the spine that is in the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in joints due to moisture occurs at each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and remedies from medicines do not cure it, it is cured by cauterization in a certain way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mouth of the cauterization on the joint of the foot, and the olive-shaped cauterization according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it is your desire that you prick the cheek with a sharp point, then the cauterization is done throughout the entire cauterization as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And when pain comes to the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, it is necessary to cauterize on each knee three or four parts of the cauterization, at all the olive-shaped cauterization:
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	When you have further skill, if you do more, but hold your hand steady only as much as the task requires, and do not strain yourself too much.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends to the knee and to the back, apply the cauterization that we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	If the pain is in the hands, then make points every two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there is no more pain, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pain comes from the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part and give the patient government to the midwife and appropriate medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him medicine and purge the poison, he will be saved by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	The first sentence to translate is "de la routure dou syfac". The translation
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When the dislocation comes in twists, and the bones hang down like nails, and it is new, then it happens that when you see to cure it, it should not be removed from its place.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that it uses things that relieve stomach pain, if the pain descends from the stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after the patient is placed on their back between your hands, and they are commanded to scratch their hair until the dirt is repaired, and it is re-attached to your fingers, and you sign that there is a sign of half a circle around the curved ends, and in every way that seems like the other half of a circle.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then rinse the cauterization of this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and glistening, feel it.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the dirt on their back.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and he applies his finger to his hand to make sure they do not return.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And well works the thighs on the patient, and removes the hip bones and serjeants on the thighs, and another on the loins that ties the hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery at the sign of the thumb on all hands, and hold it firmly and as long as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach it for the first time, then repeat it again as soon as you touch the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And be careful not to let the blood seep out while doing the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that the patient does not die, or other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone at the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be done subtly according to the size of the wounds, and so with the adults as well, according to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, cure the patient's leg from burns as much as possible until the swelling subsides.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After the treatment of other wounds as much as possible until it is healthy, and hold the patient's back for 40 days after the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that his nails be long and not cut for a long time, so that the dirt does not come out when he bathes in bedrooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, he should cut a well-made belt, and every four days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him rest, that he works hard and drinks too much beer and mead, and burns too high.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he has learned this instruction, he is entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the trimming in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupturing of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When roils come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you should cauterize them according to their quantity, and it is the third part of the ear.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and no one of the ancients has said to do this cauterization on the patient at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	1. The shoulder is dislocated and I make a line for the width of the fracture, and another for the defense, and hold your hand to all the cauterized clavicle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	1. However, the first cauterizations are more gentle and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	1. there is no pain in any limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	1. When pain comes to any part of the body, whether from cold or injury, and this pain lasts for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the cauterization that is called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb and its narrowness and sharpness and its knot and its location of knots and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healthy enough for the first cauterization, that is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if this is the case, then another cauterization should be made on the same member that was affected, because it is customary to die in the member that is affected, but you must make the cauterizations as long as the patient's health allows;
de meselerie	of miscarriage
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Miscarriages are never helped by cauterization once, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you see the cauterization? Be warned if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not last or does not tire, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, therefore I make the cauterizations on the main member:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I remove the head, and the other at the end of the cheeks.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and I remove the two corners, and the back removes the arrow.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I hold the hand so much that the fire cautery comes to the bone, and so much that the pus comes out fast, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and I cauterize the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the scar is scattered everywhere.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if the wound is clearly visible, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned or head, and I cauterize at the end of the shoulder, and II cauterize at the end of the back, and I grant the hip and the other parts, and II at the two shoulders.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And II cut the sides, and II cut the tendons as much as possible, and I cut each joint of the hands and feet, and cut the pits of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and cut the nerves that are under the heels, which you do not burn.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never done a cauterization on the bone, and I did it on the stomach bone, and I did it on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And advise that the more you do cauterization, the more help you get, and it benefits you.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And advise that the patient does not feel pain during cauterization if they do not feel it, because the heart is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it should be that the fire cautery is large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the dough with flour and honey, and other remedies, as long as it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation comes to any part of the body and is cured by medicines and ointments and plasters, and it is not healthy, therefore I make a cauterization on the part according to its size and thickness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and if the cauterization is made on a small part of the flesh.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never made is cauterization at the hand, arm, and back, after the least amount of skin that holds the part, and if it inflames the part.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and nothing enters in between if it is not known of the members and the movements of the arms.
de albaras	of barbers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease known as "albaras" is awakened, and the art of medicine offers no help, then the fire cautery is used on a small part, according to the quantity of the esparment, until the bleeding stops and the color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then the treatment of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and cures for the colon and anus, each for a part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it all be mixed together, and apply it with a cloth, and wash the limb as often as necessary until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore first appears, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done at the cauterization point that seems to be a circle, all around the circumference of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And everyone says that a cauterization is made at the site of the gangrene.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And everyone says that this does not seem strange to me, because I believe it is ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted this to happen once.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the most correct thing is that they are cauterized at the entrance, at the cauterization called "circulation", as we have said in our mouth about cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the flesh that cannot be cut
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to measure or because of the excess it makes or because of the old age of the patient when he is old (that is, too many) and has little blood, or for lack of tension.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	And you see the surgery as a means to an end.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	However, the cautery is performed by pricking with the tip of the instrument.
aprés le laisse ensi.	After which it is left to its own devices.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will try to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it struggling to die, if the cautery is hot enough, then it is the form of the cautery that causes it.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	When the patient has the disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is perceived by the cur, and such cauterization that the patient feels it in a way that the course of the urine is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, when it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a rot of the member, because it eats the members as it does the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the shoulder that can suffer from fire cautery, then sharpen the cauterizing instruments according to where the shoulder or the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cautery of all parts as much as possible, there will be nothing left of it, and everything that is corrupted will become osteit.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it remain for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil until the scars from the hot iron are healed and all the corruption is cured.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy children are not born, it is bad.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If not, then if it resumes the cauterization on that which is required to remove the decayed hairs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this disease has never been treated with medical care in the place of fire cauterization;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said the treatment of the ague in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take what you have at your disposal.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of porings that come to the toe
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	often happens that the toe is affected by a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that causes pain in the toe.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know that the treatment is by fire cauterization, and by hot iron cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Cauterization with fire is that you shave and cut the hair as a pen of wool, and it should be made of iron in the size that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After the bone is cut at the joint, and turn your hand completely around the pin as it comes out of the bone.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it for three days until it begins to secrete milk.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of freshly boiled barley flour with milk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the bones will be loosened from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they become converted by fever, and many times come out and in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you do a hot cauterization.
et est en teil maniere:	and is done in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	1. Take a nail or iron rod, or a feather quill, and put it on the clavicle and the sternum, it is to know how to remove rudenesses.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	2. And if it pierces the whole thickness, then he puts a small piece of hot wax, and holds your hand firmly, and turns it around until the edge of the nail touches the root of the bone, and then find the hot wax path smoothly just below the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	3. And endure the pain of the hot wax bite for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	4. Then leave it alone, and it will fall apart at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I then make another after, as you are raising all these that are in the course, and cure the wounds that entangle hair.
li cure dou trembler	I cure it to stop trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When any tremble from cold, or fever, or other cause, it comes that you must make four cauteries or four on the spine, one cauteries between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and I cauteries or pierce, and I make a cauteries on the stomach with the olive cauteries.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if you let it tremble, and when it gets better of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pimples that have appeared.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time is seen by defuers the body's skin, or pustles that come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if it comes that at first you must make a cauteries on each tip of the pimple when they appear.
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cauteries of mithra's pitch, or if the tip is seized by fire, or from the root of Aristolochia long, or on the lenticular cauteries.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never does the cauterization begin at the start when they appear, according to this manner, and it cannot grow hair in front, but it is disrupted by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is tied off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Often there are great dislocations of blood from the artery that is covered by the wound that comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of a limb, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a great grief to cleanse.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And then, when there is none, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press it as much as it is not calmed by your finger, and does not cause more pain.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then, place the olive-wood cauteries that are both small and large on fire, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then, I, according to the size of the wound and the strength of the vein, and whether it is arterial or venous, place the cauterization on the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterization as long as it is not extinguished.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If it happens that you feel your child's vein when you prick it with the cautery, and the cautery has stopped, then quickly take another cautery that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this until the other is exhausted.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and make sure you do not burn the flesh that is already cooked, and no other harm comes to the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and make sure you do not cut the artery too deeply, because if it is large, it cannot be well healed immediately after the artery is cut, and this can only be done by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization or extraction when it is not well treated, or by strong sewing thread, or by medicines placed on it that can help to heal the wound.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And let it be tied and held tight.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will manage the tightening of the knots or the placement of burning things on, or other similar things, should not profit from it if he does not have time.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if there is no remedy or medicine available, then place your finger on the wound as we have described, and hold it firmly until it is sore from the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move the patient, but their arm should be cold often, as it is usually cold and becomes frozen and swollen and sore.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make sure to have beforehand the materials needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "The second book of surgical procedures begins.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	In our previous chapter, we discussed the first cauterization or burning medicine, and its uses, causes, effects, and forms of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	I have placed the fire cautery of the head of the shoulder, and I will go to this chapter by my own way because it is lighter than the other.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	2. And if I begin this, it is necessary, my dear, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I advise you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many methods used in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such people who are with their disease so lightly that they die by the force of their disease and the greatness of their malice;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And from these, one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these I say to you, 
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am hurried.
et li maladie est despitouse.	And the disease is dangerous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is only by your consent that those who come to you can do this in this way, but put more trust in your honor than in your covenant, and do not advise him foolishly but wisely of what you are certain and what you have taken or lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use divination and indication in the cures of your patients for health to be converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of the long-lasting.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Thrice-blessed are our Lords, who give understanding and rightness to you, and if you wish to hope for the holy inspiration of their hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in declaring it as a cauterization, according to the cauterizations, which I have declared for the chief joints, because you will find it more lightly than other work.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full-fledged joint with inflammation.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	1. This disease often comes to children several times in the womb of the mother, and when the child is pulled too hard by the head.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	2. And never has this come from a reason that can be known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	3. And I have never seen this disease happen in anyone but in children, and in those that I have seen, it has caused death.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	4. And for this reason, I think it is better to leave the work of this chapter in part treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	5. And I have seen a child of whose head was swollen with inflammation, and the head grew larger each day until it could not be supported.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And he thought so much of the moisture that it caused his death, and this moisture is gathered between the bone and the sinew, from the knee to the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	And the work is such that if the moisture is between the knee and the bone, and the incisions are small, then you should cut off the head with a wide slice.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	And so long as the moisture persists, until the swelling decreases.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And then there is the form of the salve:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, then I will make incisions in this manner: according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is between the bone, and you see the corners of the head swollen from each part, and the heat shakes when you press with your hand on the dent, and this has not been repaired:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary to cut off the head of the shoulder, then you must cut it off in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After pulling out the threads and powders, and mix in wine and oil, and leave it for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then dress the wound with bandages and poultices, and let the shoulder be evenly pressed, and then apply the blister of dry meat to the member as much as it is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is to look at or open the mouth of the abscess, and assemble the sharp edges.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For no time has it been before;
aucune fois derrier;	no time has it been behind;
aucune fois en destre;	no time has it been in front;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and no time has it been to the side;
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Measure the opening of the abscess and the fullness of the eye, and follow what you can according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and come quickly if the patient dies from blood loss, which is due to the wound and the evacuation of pus;
de reume	from the wound.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is any disease called "catarrh" which is in the nose or ear, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, therefore it is treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary, can you cover the eyes, that the patient suffer no harm to his head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the leg with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then tighten the bandage around the neck as much as possible.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at whether the vein is bent, and the letters on both sides are after the ears, and they are responded to.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the veins with a sharp needle, and cut both ends of a piece of skin as thin as possible, until the size comes to the bone, and this is by the widest part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, cut the cloth over the artery and cover it with a nail, by cutting as much as necessary, just like two.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is pricked, it will continue to bleed without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open by feeling, then measure the quantity of the space of III degrees, then mark the vein and cut it to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And it comes to pass that when there is need for sixty sutures, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the wound is not on the bone and the dressing that was applied does not come off, then press on the wound and hold it in place, and treat it with ointment as long as it remains healthy.
de emigrainne	The first sentence to translate is "de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the head begins to ache, and the gout comes, and the moisture from tears and sweat causes the old pain to worsen, and it is treated with ways of medical cures and all that does not benefit it, if we stricken the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them if the patient has hair on his temples, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is only slightly reponed as opposed to any men who are too rough.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	When it is reset, if it tightens the neck of the patient's shoulder from some cloths, then rub the shoulder with some rough cloth and warm water until the artery is clearly visible.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of the material that is here formed:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then lightly scrape the light leather until you reach the artery, then raise it to the top with tweezers, and remove all the threads that are loose from each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is subtle, then turn it to the tip of the uncinate bone, then the hook of that part according to the number of the two heads;
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not crowned, then it will not be able to move at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And take out six pints of blood, as needed.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then take out two pints of blood at a time, using a double-stranded silk thread that does not come before the wound and causes dislocation of the joint.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then remove the excess that is between the two hundred and sixty threads in that hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization of the fire cautery is enough for the bone as long as the heads are removed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the worst work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the fire cautery is aid to finish the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For this reason, it is of greater help when moisture is present.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	It is necessary to extract the veins by filling the groove of the arm with soft cotton and tying it well made ties.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you untie them, be sure to use dry medicines that make the wound healthy and bandages.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if there is no artery cut, as you wish, then if you need to cauterize, use your arm of vitrol and hold it in your hand so that it does not become infected.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have this presently, then put the arm of yours in as much as it does not freeze, and wash it with cold water as often as possible, and hold it tightly as it should be.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And what is heavier and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cautery cutting with two parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer on the pain.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the storm is too fierce, then it holds less charm.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two cuts one that is large enough, and then when you see the two ends coming together, hold the fire red as long as it reaches the bone, and close the vein in the two cuts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And they should be separated between the two heads because this fire cautery is not suitable for everything.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the hairs are descending from the veins that are exposed to the heat of fire, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment, and you see the patient's face swelling, and you feel like frenzy, so much so that it resembles a seizure.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And if the hair is thin and moist, so that the paper's hair looks wet, and the papers are smoking, and burned by the heat of the tears, then it has something to do with this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the "fractured cure," and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease, the hair that he has or front, then I made three cuts on the front according to its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And let one of the furrows be as the other two at the front, when advancing, but do not advance too far, and the others are the costels by which the papers are placed, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are caused by the papers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And move your hand away from the continuation of the II mandibules, and each wound should be treated with III quantity at the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And make sure to have a piece of sponge and wipe the sac with cloth, then apply the ointment in two parts of this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is made in the temple to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And scorch all that is between the two flaps of the entire face that is exposed to the bone, then make another incision along the other second, and then extract this splinter.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	2. If the bone is stuck in the first finger with the instrument called "cultellary," and it is very well cut on one side but not on the other, do not cut further, and this is the shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	3. Then the costeit is cut towards the cheek and the bone is suefy towards the bone, and the dislocation as far as it reaches to the second incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the veins that descend from the head as hairs until the incision is continued as it was open, and then make another incision along the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then extract the blood evenly, and express the leu for the blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place a piece of clean cotton in each vein, and wrap it with soft cloths soaked in wine and oil, and make sure that the wound does not leak.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And at the end of the third day, the limb is removed, and great quantities of tincture of iodine are applied, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu com
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	If no one comes with a cataract treatment, and you see the hairs thick and short, the eyes distorted, and the papers burned.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	And the hair grows, and it causes great pain in the eye, and the patient suffers.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	However, these accidents are better than those materials and that cataract not coming from many veins, and the cure that is here.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And is that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut along the forehead, and another wide one below it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begins with the burning of the left temple to the right temple, and it is the incision just to the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and pulls your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the ear;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out onto a sponge, and then dries between the two lips of the burn and puts cotton on it, and tries lin;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	and applies softened drapes rolled in wine and oil, and keeps away from infection;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is hardened, if you must rub the bone as much as possible until it starts to crack, then the treatment of things that are excised, which make the hair grow back;
En teil maniere:	1. "In this manner:" - This phrase is used to introduce a new action or process.
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	1. Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of silk, and make a paste;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	2. And apply this paste to these wounds to prevent infection.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the fever of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	3. All that affects the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	4. or grains, or beast, or mineral point, or similar thing as though it were made;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	5. or seed, if it is like grass, seeds, peas:
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	6. or thing that flows, if it is like fever and chill and similar things:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes to the ear, if the piercing or another part of the thing does not fit well in the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	7. If you see the point, if no drop of violet or lavender oil is distilled from any vessel, then apply the extraction:
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And I made it thinner with condensation, and it sweats on the nose when it condenses comes, and puts it into the ear pieces of wool or linen.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and it is in the ear down.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times comes out through this treatment.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, it is the extraction of needles, which is this form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	And if it jumps out as needles, that's good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	And if not, then the extraction of the bone with a small drill.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not jump out, then I make a ring of iron and cut the head of the ring or the ear hole, and it sweats which is inside the ring of wax so that it cannot enter with the ring.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the hot iron forms, for fire comes so often as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come in part like this, then it gets stuck in the bones and puts on any instrument that is not pointed for this purpose, and puts a piece of cotton in between.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the hot iron on the wound or whatever it is, and fire comes.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come from all these things we have said, if you do not split the ear but only cause an abscess and come, and spasm.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the way to split it if you do is to first cut the head of the shoulder according to its strength, then hold the shoulder in your hands and turn the ear away from the face, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or depending on the limb.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And let the burn be as a moon, until you reach the hole, then the bone according to your pain, and the saliva is hastily in your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grainy and oozes, then administer extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot be expressed, then administer this remedy according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not make haste when you think the grain is moist from the ear, as long as you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract it with fine forceps and at the saliva, as we have said, if the extractions are alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, that the patient has grains in the ear, it is necessary that the surgeon uses the first condiement of the cloth and amplifies the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let there be caution with the same ear or eye.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for this reason, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If this does not work, then if you have many spikes according to the length of your arm, remove them at your own risk and lightly scrape them off.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	Then put the helper on the ear, and it comes out through its other holes, and comes out of another hole that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And continue to make this cut until the wound is fully healed, and then it will jump all at once.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see, if you have a wound, and cut one of the ears, and the other ear holds on tightly until the pain is less, then.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then I made another incision as much as it needed, until all was out, as we have said in the opening.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the removal of the fetus, if it is small in size, like a pea and similar things, cure as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large in size, one can feel it, by using forceps for extraction.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and that is the more gentle thing to do in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the removal of the ears' jewelry, if you are careful as we have said in the division and when treating distillations, and the care does not profit much, if it comes that you look at the ear with the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If it is not opened at all, if the forceps are subtle, and if it is not noticed, then take the chain of this case in your hand:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow and wide.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And cut off the more subtle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then they will all form together as a chain.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until you see that it is all done.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not follow in seeing, then stifle the chain of cotton as I said in the wound.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not swell as we said, then administer distillations that the ancients have used in the decision of the verse, and you will find them or treat them with distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	If you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, either it will be shaped as you see fit:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And may silver or gold wires be inserted through the small holes, and then be distilled.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press the distillation onto the well-made silver instrument, and if you see the nasal hair removal and envelope around the point of the tip:
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then you can pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the tube, and the tube is in the ear:
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then blow the hair removal tool with all your strength, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear:
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	The patient feels pain, and it is the distillations that are in the ear; however, they are not drawn out immediately due to heat.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and make sure it is not too cold, as the medicine would not work if it were not.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the fever of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without having purulent otitis.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And this same thing happens due to inflammation of the wound, or from a child being born with an ear infection, and these inhalations never come back into the ear unless one can see.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And it has never been seen that the purulent otitis is cured, and it is well seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes in front of it, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of further healing, and then you must put the maid's ear to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and watch diligently:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the apparent inflammation, if the work has done all this swelling of coi, then it is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And so and behind and below it, if it does not cause the ear to bleed:
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the inflammation is of the ear or the ear's cartilage, if you hold it with fine forceps and a light grip, as long as the ear is entirely free:
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the exfoliation is fully removed from the ear, if you take a soft gentle rasping tool and slightly heat it, then it puts on either char or cors of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the ointment that the patient hears with grief, gently pierce, and keep your fingers away from the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put a tent in the ear according to the large pustule, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do not use any jar until the wound is sore, or take a tent and apply pink ointment, and powder with vitrol broile.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear is swelling, then pull out the tent and roll another soft tent made of rose oil and wax, as long as it does not hurt.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor, as long as he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. If the discharge of blood increases, then dip a sponge and wet it with cold water, and place it in the ear, and use other remedies that stop the flow of blood, which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the scroll of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	The one who comes from papers of hairs when they are moist and dry, if it happens that you extend them with needles and tweezers, and the crown of a spatula made of its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then put the head in a vitreous ball.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it is not cut, then the fire cautery subtle one, and the cautery after the incision is worth doing.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And they are often repaired, but nothing tired of their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are burned by fire, those roots are ass and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the grease
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times, things come in papers from the hairs that seem wrinkled in their form and hardness, and for this it is this disease called "granulation", and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper of these and soaks.
li ovraiges est telz:	The dissection is such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	The granulation is held by two parts and it is light to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	After making the incision large, then scrape each part gently, then take it with tweezers and the thread.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not cut the thread with a little paper, if it does not hurt the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if it is sharp, then assemble a suture, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, then do not make too much force, because the remaining parts will not restore it and cause further harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the grain falls down to the base of the ear towards the part below, if reversed, and the grain is picked up with tweezers, and the cloth is pressed from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the grain is picked up, if you lift the salty ointment, and treat the skin of that which causes further harm as much as possible until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	2. of the grease of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	1. "Exinach" is a grease that is engraved on the sheets of papers, and this happens more as children grow older, and it causes pain to their eyes, and they come to the catharsis in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears come to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	2. And because they sleep with their faces turned away, and lie down on them, and their papers are wet from the moisture that the child has rubbed on them, and the appearance is covered with the grease of exinach that has opened in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	When you press on your joint and feel the exertion within it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	3. And the way of the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And then take a piece of cloth, and make a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exudation from each part, and then put it on.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands on both sides, until the exudation is gathered in the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then put the patient in a wet cloth and sharpen a knife that is as wide as the wound you make when cleaning the vein, but not larger.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut it as much as you see the exudation.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in other positions, the exudation comes from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	1. Draw the thread all around your two legs, and turn your right and left hands as many times as it takes to separate them.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	2. And make sure you do not strain the thread in the needle, that it does not go all the way to the head, that it does not break.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	3. And if the thread does not open at the beginning of the needle, then lightly open the thread as much as it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	4. Then draw the thread as we have said, then cut the cord in two parts and tie it to your leg, and draw it tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men break their silk and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is dried.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure, as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the abscess apoplexy, then the cure should apply dressings as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the paper's hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on papers other than their nature, and they are awakened, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as customary tears and softening of the paper and albugine, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And the cure is according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Or by fire cauterization alone, or by medicinal burning according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done by cutting and stitching or by stitches, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your left hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your right hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If she is converted, it is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, then insert an awl in all the flesh of it.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	And let this be the margin of the paper or the hair that grows from these hairs, and tear all the flesh at the edges, and turn it to the rasp.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then in the part of the edge of the paper, the hair is adjusted, to all the sputum coping, from the large armor to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then remove the flesh, and put a small tent of cotton and drapery on the paper, then mark on the paper a figure of an enche, as the full moon, and when it is all done, it will come that the figure is according to the quantity you see being raised by the paper that is designed.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if a part that has skill is able to handle a great quantity of paper according to the paper's flexibility.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make all the stitches according to the two lines you have written, and start with a large, firm knot but gradually.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and then use one of the gaps near the natural hair in its growth, then cut the root at one of the two angles, and scrape it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then assemble the two ends with a stitch using a needle of one aguille for all the subtle thread of wool, and remove the blood, and dry the superfluity of threads on the two scissors for any glutinous things, if you see this being done.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	If not, if there is no cure, then leave the stitching and threads until III days or IV.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound with things that are loose and constricting, as the paper relaxes with the soaking of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is too tight (as they say in the old days), and it causes pain.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you see the paper as a figure that is also like the curve of the arrow, as we have experienced, at III inches, follow the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes he who surpasses with equal force according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take a needle or a thread, and the thread will mark the figure.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and take another thread of the same length as the large hammer, and the second thread of the small size, and assemble the threads correctly between your two.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then gently smooth your hand correctly, and gently smooth all the leather where you have cut, as we have experienced, then stitch the edges of the wound as evenly as possible, and treat it as long as it is healthy.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if the abscess comes to your incision, then calm the inflammation and the pain by applying warm compresses and gentle massage.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never happened that the hair of the paper was converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If you follow what we have said about the incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	However, the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of the wounds is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And if you were to convert the paper and make it according to what I have said, and then make the wounds by hand, and tie them as finely and long as the paper and the widest part of the swelling is.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And cut as you hold the threads.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then stitch the two ends finely according to what is over the paper of the oil, and tighten the knots of the wounds.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if the force is not applied immediately, then the treatment will be delayed until it is safe.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is dressed and the paper is lifted, and no more hair will be tied.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the second crops that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The workings are such that you need a fine needle, and you pull one end of the silk thread.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then assemble the heads and carefully observe one and the other, and the length of the threads should be long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order a fine silk thread for each head, and note the number of threads.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head in your hand.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And if the sun is shining, then you should open it if possible, because these are subtle and small veins, then pull the thread all around in the root of the hair that is most dense, and draw it through the paper as you move the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair until it reaches the root, and pull out the hair in the root, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then, draw your hand as soon as the hair grows all over the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the hair is treated and the hair does not grow with it, then you will cut off the hair at the base as ordered, as long as the hair does not grow and you see it through the oil's vision.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	However, if you cut off the hair and the thread, and leave the oil and the leaf open for two or three days, as long as the hair grows in its place and the wound appears.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is shortened, and if long hair from the head is grown on it, and it is cut with that which you have left, as long as it is lengthened and then trimmed.
de la porriture de l’oil	2. of the oil's dregs
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the food comes in the oil, if it happens in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	1. naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of the wound is to cut it, and clean the lips of it, and put lint on it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And only what you use in the treatment of it are things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, then the disease becomes worse than the first.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but it works as things that soften, like figs.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the ash of the fire and the seed of lin are cooked, and the oil is melted in no oil at all, and wrapped in a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And your treasure is if you keep guard that it does not become worse according to the form it was before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and the cases we have said are none that are not caused by this disease, that it does not relapse according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the care that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "acaratism" is truly called "acaratism," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wound and fracture and cauterization and things similar.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the course of the work is if you take a needle, and if it has two threads, and the file in the char, and it seems to perceive on the left arm as much as on the right, if the threads come in the shoulder of the char;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the chair is at disadvantage to all the thread, and the cover is to the large spatulum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if it seems like the paper returns according to what it should, that's good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, then take the rasor and put it in the fire, and turn the paper, and make as many fires as the paper can endure.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the heads of the two angles of the incision you have covered be as the two angles of a letter that has no "I griesche"; and when they are assembled, it should look like a letter.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then the chair, according to the quantity that its cost is as it should be, of what teaches the paper, then adjust the two loose parts, and the cost of a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then comes the cure of what we have said about softening medicines and bandages, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from burning or cutting or cauterization, then you must shave the area smooth with the hair removed from the paper, and according to what is before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then dip between the two lips of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And it must be done according to the form of the disease, as it is of different forms, and the skilled masters are able to make everything come back to its natural shape;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient themselves, according to what is necessary for the opening and extraction of more parts in different ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	2. If the paper is soaked, then it must be dried.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this sutures are made by women in a certain way that the paper on it is soaked with white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must cut the point of a razor soaked in oil and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and you bend them as much as possible while you copy what is written on the soothing substance, which is neither too rough nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the soothing substance being too rough or making the oil run;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and so is your incision, which you burn the assembly lightly, if that paper regenerates according to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healed completely, and there are no times of the salty wet oil, and the soft wet oil, and the heat.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and place on the oil soft wool in an abundance of ointment.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day use hot water and things that are sour as long as it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the finger of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Says that the nail can be done in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	She is nervous and resembles the hard skin of an iron, and another that is not nervous but resembles a frozen mucus, which when touched with fire and cooked with tongs, cannot be opened.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And the one and the other resemble the great fear, and grow little by little until they cover all the eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient places his head in the sand, then he operates on the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And gently place the paper in your hand, then take one of the tongs with a small double hook, and hold it steady.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or sheephair, or cowhair, and make it thick.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	Then double the point of the needle with a pinch, and thread the hair through it, and perforate all the needle, and tie the hair with a thread and hang it at the end, and scrape off all the hair from the edge of the hair that covers the prunelle and silk on the chief, then cut off the remaining part in the root of the arm as subtle and as small forces as possible, and leave the natural or artificial one, so that by incision does not come the heart's usual tears.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And never has a toe been set once, and so on, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the scorching is applied, and all the skin is burned, and that is the form of it.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the scorching does not touch the charred skin and break it, and the prunella is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	And after the incision, grease it with oil a small piece of linen thread, and a cloth is made from litargire, and it is left for the other day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care of that which is needed until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	If the finger is not tense, and you do not force the needle, and the bones do not enter, this appears as a sign of anxiety in the finger of medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, then use the light oil of the maiden, and take the soft sponge according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And gently remove the finger underneath, and if you see that it does not become red and the reason is from your mouth, distill the ointment made of litargire and rouge coliere and seil broiet, and it will steep in the oil until the other day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then it resumes another evacuation according to this same work, as long as it is all done.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in the oil, like a sore, then the milk and cure the sore first until it is healthy, then continue the incision as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is dark in the oil, and it has spent in the onion, and a part is not all, that corps of tears does not come;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then it distills into the oil that is made of litargire which is red and warm.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that was pricked by the thorn
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men's hairs never turn red, and they cut the prune and wrap it in papers and hang it up, and it seems like a rose of balsam.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	When the patient is instructed if the surgeon places his head in your hand, then he operates on the eyes, and turns all that can be turned loose, and supports it with force.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then follow the first step, and pull everything to the end, and make sure you do not pull the oil out of the wound.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the incision be as sharp as the one we mentioned in the incision of the toe, and with small forces you can cut it off, if after this chapter you demonstrate that it is like this.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	When the incision is completed and all the pain is relieved, if you use olive oil or distill red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and apply it with a cotton ball dipped in urine, so that it is sure to stop bleeding.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	If it does not cause any pain, and the wound is large, and you doubt the healing of the wound, then leave the oil and treat the wound with things that soothe the healing of the wound.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work as soon as it is healed, and then make several cuts in the oil by this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is necessary that you treat the cure of every weak oil of the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in the work of iron.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that the limb is sore in that work.
des voines des eulz	of veins of hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If the veins are red and covered with oil, and they touch the eye and injure the other parts.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	The first sentence translates to: "Firstly, look at the oil that comes out, if it is thin, there is no other disease but the oil.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	However, the cilium in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand, then stretch those wounds all over according to your judgment, and make the wounds subtle as in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be cut in degrees of one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then with your hand force the wounds to be subtle, and remove the blood as soon as you can see the bloodier wounds of the oil:
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be careful not to bleed the oil with points of spatula, and do this work by noon before the sun, and be patient in your work so that you do not miss any wounds:
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have this done, if you distill it in the green and red oil to corrode what is decaying and unclean.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot distill all of it in that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the limbs, and leave some on for as long as the pain is soothed and the wound is secured against infection, then resume according to this method as soon as it is healthy.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the form of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fissure of the anus
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mirer, if it is called "arissti" fistula,
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure with cauterization and by using the burning medicine according to what I have stated earlier, and it is not completely healed, then it must die, and all the moisture that it has, as long as the wound is open.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the wound is completely healed, and you will see the corruption and blackening, if all the instruments of this case are made of the same material.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and is called "sharp edge," and should be made of hard material, and should be cut as fine as a razor when it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place the end of the bone on the corrupt bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand a little as you sense that corruption is receding.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this only once, then restore the bone with excremental medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it is seen that the belly is swollen and hard, and the belly of the bowel is swollen, and remains for forty days, and it does not renovate and is not much affected, and accidents do not come, you should be careful that it is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, then there is no other way but to return the fistula to the neck of the newborn according to this form.
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And it is that you remove the second time from the bone with forceps and with medicines, and when he endures it according to this form, and the head of the forceps is at an angle of III degrees, and it should be as smooth as possible, so that you can see like this:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place the head of the forceps on the shoulder bone, and smooth your hand with oil, then turn the forceps completely so that it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you were holding your hand on your neck.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the medicated wound with dry dressings as I have shown you, and when he is healed and endures the pain, it will be the matter of the neck.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If there is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	1. of the issue of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the wound is open and does not stop bleeding, and there is no sign of infection or poisoning, then you must first treat the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then, the wound is cleaned with vinegar or vinegar without harming the skin, then it is anointed with oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcole, and then the oil is strained, and it is applied to bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the cloth is managed if you use enough wet cloths, and double each one, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound has.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then comes strain by hard pressure of a bend, and restarts the veins with sucking without feeling pain.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then comes the veins and leaves the strained oil for hours and nights, and the ligaments become loose, so that you must pull it out.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then comes the ligament after the night and night, and if you see the oil repaired, it's good.
se ce non;	If not.
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the friction resumes and the cloths, the ligaments, and the veins as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A sudden dislocation of the eyelid
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come in the eye fabric, then it opens and comes out paper if like a grain of resin, and is difficult to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	When you see this, the work is such that you can insert an awl at the root of the part that is swollen and inflamed, then insert another awl where there is a double thread of the part that is painful.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and then remove the first awl according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then remove the second awl and pull out a part of the urethra, then pull it well, then remove the awl and put on some oiled linen in abundance.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the threads are healed with the urethra, then treat the wound with things that are comfortable as long as the wound is healthy.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	For no time is the wound restrained by any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is sound.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the hairs have a great appearance, if it is pricked with a subtle needle that comes from the oil, and removes the moisture and descends the hairs, and comes to the end soonest.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the extraction is done as long as it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" is not worse than boils that are assembled in the oil, appearing as sharp descending, and it is not sharp.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of appearance of the wound is if you wish to sit the patient on the side and straighten the arm, then take the head between your hands of two parts, and hold it as long as you see the bone coming to the end of your fingers.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then cut it off, and do not let it descend and be untangled, and see the patient's things as they should be.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not descend, you should know that it is acute, and if the bone comes out of the wrist is not straight as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you wish to sit the patient between your hands, then take the scalpel subtly and make a cut under the corneal layer I poc by continuing the conjunctive with the corneal layer and the cornea, as long as the bone comes out.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the dislocation occurs, if it is treated with hot oil mixed with honey, or hot vinegar and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment once it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the appearance of waters in the division, and what must be done to perceive it.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	If it is done according to the health of the patient.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you place the patient's arm between your hands, using the light of the sun, and the oil is healthy and tightly moistened.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper of the oil in your left hand, with the hairs growing towards the left, or in your right hand with the hairs growing towards the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, make the hairs on your left side straight, the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand, or the hairs on your left side straight.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument at the coronet through the largest ring in the bladder of the arm, then use the "almagda" instrument gently, and pull your hand as it pierces the bladder of the arm, and feel that almagda is entering the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda hole is at the end of the spout that is close to the prunes.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And it is the crown of the oil.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument just where it is, then press down on one or more holes afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it becomes inflamed now, if it sees the surgeon in front of it and the instrument in its own hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting the small bone, and if the hammer moves the second hole, place the force with the instrument, and when it is aligned and does not move, lightly twist your hand around a little at a time.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then place the hammer on a little glue, and lift the oil from it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply a layer of oil, either finely ground in rose oil and with an excess of urine, and bind it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kin, put on clothes with much meat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil cannot enter through the hair because it is too hard, since there are too many men with very hard hairs, then you must use the instrument called "alberit," which looks like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce only the conjunctive, and do not cut too much at once, but make a small hole, then let it out slowly, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the completion of the work, the patient appears to the surgeon with the head covered, in case he sleeps on his back in the dark limb.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And it is necessary for all movements, and feed light foods, and do not move the head to the right or left, and it should be aligned according to its natural position.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then the patient lies in this dark room, and examines his eyes, and sees nothing, and then he resets the joint according to the ninth day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is necessary that you do this in the surgeon's office or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the pain increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When the abscess is about to rupture, you should carefully remove the oil from before the ninth day, and address the one who is causing the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is calmed down, remove the eye and place it in its socket to cover any day for as long as possible, and stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then leave the house quickly and convert into your case.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and advise that no disciple should enter this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And some came to us who were from Yrach, who told us that in some places they made ointments for the fever, but we have never seen any of these in our land, nor have we ever read about them in the ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of maggots, because those who do not know them by sight.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and be true maggots properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	Of the chest, the wound
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Never are born or do not arise diverse kinds of fleas, because there are none that seem to be scorpions at the mouth of the feet.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if they are of such or have an enhanced appearance of fleas with different colors, and if they are of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of these fleas which are of bone color and do not enhance, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and works her nostrils, and greases the bones with those charms, and they are formed.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then try to hold it with the subtle spray of a part, as long as you feel that the char is complete.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there is nothing left to try, then examine all the subtle and light secretions, so that it does not cause any harm.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it does not overwhelm you, or cause an abortion, if the secretions are like this, then it is correct.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it is an abortion of malignant secretions, then apply the cauterization as soon as possible, and burn them until they are unstained and all the charms are turned, then grease or wet with wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it is not worked on, and moisture comes to the palace, it becomes unhealthy.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if moisture penetrates not as it should, it causes harm, and the bones in the affected area may not grow properly, and the wounds may not be properly trimmed.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore, it is necessary to cut the end of the thread with a little thickness, and it should be made of hands, and have an interval of at least one inch between each knot.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And place the patient's head on the thread, and tie it as tightly as possible, and tighten it as much as possible, until it reaches the corner of the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	For many times they make the child go to school, and it is a light thing for him who sees it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes from the left hand and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and guide them one after the other in a straight line as we who are or are not do.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as long as you know that the nail has corrupted this char, then take out the child, excrete the sand, and grease the child with Egyptian ointment, and put him back in the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this three times or more, until the greased corrodes all that is made of char.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then he puts on or takes off any necessary bandage as soon as it is dry, and if he has experience in herbal remedies, then he uses them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, and it is used by distilling the oils and medicines or essences.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is made of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a lantern, and it is led in the same way.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see, if I make a closed lamp to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it has a handle for the patient to hold while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the chest, the wound
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times it happens in the head of a child who is suffering from a disease called "telly" which grows and becomes large, as one can see when looking at it.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And that's why you should cut it at the beginning, and then put the hot iron or medicated ointment on it.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay cutting it as much as it is large, then if it is hard, with a rough color, and poor sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If you do not cut it with iron because it is an infected wound, because if you cut it once, it will always cause great pain to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the patient holds their breath tightly, not due to fear but from pain, and you see that it can be covered completely if the patient is empty and the chest does not move, and the surgeon cures the patient of things that are loose and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the bone is cut and crushed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when a solution for continued treatment comes from one of these cartilages, it does not benefit much, and this is true in no man's case.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary therefore to cut if there is no other way, if you look at the wound being fresh at all its depth.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then cut off the two lips with a stitch, and treat it as soon as it is safe.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already torn from both sides, it is necessary to scrape all parts of them as they heal, and then cut off the two lips with a stitch, and draw them together, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and incense the wound.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he puts powder on a piece of plaster or another kind of soft plaster, and leaves it until it has dried, then the treatment of ointment as soon as it is dry.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of sewing if you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal sewing;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	2. of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At hands the gums of the incision are dense, resembling grains of sand, and smaller and larger.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	However, you must turn the gums of the incision, and cut them each time on a different side, and take them with tweezers and close them in each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then use the hand after the incision of hot needles, as long as they are not in pain.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then use the other hand to dry the hand, and cure the hand with dry things as soon as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the horse's gallbladder
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times on the thighs are found hard knots, which they call "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If it is necessary to hold it with your fingers, and the loop at its root, and leave the bow or the vein.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put on the hand hot needles or other restricting and desiccating powders.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that knot returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the loop second time, and cauterize.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If there is no recurrence after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the stitches made with copper.
des sordens	of the wounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	No times are assembled at the root of the teeth, the mouth is opened between the lips, and gums that are rough and thick are scraped.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And never is the black and yellow tooth touched, until corruption comes to the gum, and it becomes pale.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If you must put the patient's head between your hands, and his chin in yours, and pull on the teeth or gums that are visible, until it does not hurt.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and I make of black and green and yellow and the others ties, as they are wound.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if it is at the first reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then return to the second reason and the third time, as long as you have everything ready.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and observe that the tooth has the ability to perform different forms of extraction according to what it demonstrates, because the raker that tightens the teeth has other shapes than the one that is between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others are with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you are treating the patient's tooth pain that you delay your treatment as much as possible, as it should not be done.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a substance high in juice, therefore there is no excuse for delaying treatment.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is constrained to rest, it may be necessary that you are certain about the tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain of the patient is relieved, and make sure it is not a toothache, and treat the tooth root.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and there is no further pain for this, as long as the patient is still suffering, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are sure of the tooth, if it is necessary to scrape the tooth all around, use a sharp tool to avoid damaging the gums of all parts.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then the mustard has your duties or thin nails at the first poth and pit, as they are well embedded, then it firmly affirms the nails.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's head be in your sacred hands between your fingers, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth firmly with the pliers, and if it does not break, then take none of these springs and pull lightly on each part, and the tooth will move as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the dressing is felt and mixed, then you must fill it with bandages, wherever the wounds are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	And if the extraction is made subtly with nails, that it does not break during the extraction.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it is necessary to wisely cover the thigh to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well warned that you will not break the tooth, and there will remain a part, and it remains with the patient due to the malice of the root, causing greater pain in the first place.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And make sure you do not break any bones by following the advice of those who are ignorant of health, who through their haste and boldness never break a single bone, and they have never harmed anyone as we have counted.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring about never by the quinseness of that great disease through its roots which they endure, or by the bone they break, as we often want.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the gum is bleeding, wash the tooth with wine or vinegar and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And if there is any evacuation of blood that often occurs, use the tooth with vitric acid.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if this does not work, if the cauterization is performed.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the fissures are, if the teeth are silent at first, long and wide, and they do not double when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large size if they do not break when pulled, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be easy to hold.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root of the tooth is sore during extraction, if you can put your thumb on the lower jawbone as far back as possible, until the tooth is loose, then pull out the roots that are called "alveolar" teeth, or if the gums look neat;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And they should be made like a lime and it is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out through all these tines, then it comes that you remove the entire root, and insert the instrument called "athali," which is a type of saw, from either side, and its shape is as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And so it is, and large if it does not break, and if its root jumps from this, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, then help from all the surgeons, and if the forms come after here:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two rains, its shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other tools that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large tines, its shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And so it is, that the surgeons are strong enough to break it, and that the hands of the surgeons are not thick:
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other surgeons, who are not large enough:
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the skilled masters make subtle incisions by themselves with their instruments, according to what the wound and the disease demonstrate, because they have some diseases or the old did not teach any instruments for the diversity of us, and it does not break the chariot or other bones, or it pours, if you seek estructions that I have said, and help with gestures, according to the form here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-holding bones that do not slip, but can hold and firm.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the medicine suitable for this, and if there is fat in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to nature, and its form is deformed, and at the same time in women with sparse hair, it comes to pass that you should cut off the tooth before it grows, and it is not right in its place, and it cannot be soaked or made smooth.
adonques lou raie;	and the root.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	If it is bitten with the tooth, then use this instrument whose form is like the small tooth, and it should be made of iron and be sharp:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping is little by little in the hands for the hardness of the teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears to be formed like this one, then the lime of a part of the lime like this is formed:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it should be made like the lark's beak.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in the lark's beak, make the tooth a little and lightly in hands, so that it does not move until it grips.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then smooth the end with any rough material, and if the teeth are too sharp and cut the tongue, then tighten the spicule as much as possible, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth lodge
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth before the gum, whether by percussion or by blowing, and the physician cannot press on it due to the swelling that it has, and you treat it with restrictive medicines, and it does not improve.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	If the wound is restrained with a golden thread, because the silver threads turn green and become slimy, but the gold does not move.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the silver threads be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth advancing, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the misaligned teeth, if it fits, as many times as you can see progress in the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then resume the covering just where you left off, and gently and wisely insert your hand, so that it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and make sure your finger is at the root of the tooth so that it does not escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then sharpen the ends of the teeth with needles, and assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth and the gum, and put it in so that it does not hurt the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it as narrow as possible, and if it does not move, or the fangs turn, if it is pulled by another tooth.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it delays and serves its purpose entirely, and this is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the second healthy teeth and the gums, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is lost, if it is replaced in its place, with fresh with fresh, as we have said:
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and does not move once that it is not sharp and painful, and never takes the form of a bone tooth of a sheep, and it is placed in its place or where it lacks, and it is tightened on as we have said, and it lasts and serves as long as we have said, and does not cause any pain.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	The tongue's left side is affected by a condition called "coper
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	There is no instance where the tongue or nature comes out, that has been known to happen.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by chance of wounding;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the openings are such that you can open the mouth of the midwife, and it has its head in your mouth, and it holds the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then take hold of the nervous and wide one, as long as the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it does not stop or come out, and it is due to pain, then cut the lingual frenulum and take hold of the wide one;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and make sure the frenulum is not too short, for the artery that is out;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	When you have finished, if you lift the leg of the red and swollen one or the cold one, then put a tent of linen on the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and the lesion of the patient every night, which he cannot read.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if blood comes out, then put a hot vinegar on the leg.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if it is not healed, then use fire cautery on the wound that is slow to heal.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then continue with another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see that the wound has changed color or blackened or hardened, and it does not hurt the patient, if it is not touched, then it is gangrene.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	If the shoulder is dislocated and it is moist, if it gushes blood, and they make a poultice of a subtle substance, and they deliver from one side and the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it does not wane in your grip, if you put vitreous beads as soon as they are cooked, then return to your hold as soon as you have everything in order;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the head of the shoulder and the neck, and treat other treatments as soon as it is healthy;
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat's abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No time comes when the throat is called "godath", and they are properly called "hammers", and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healthy, then hold them;
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is an abscess of hard texture and small size, and it is not touched with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, and it is not touched with iron, then also for the evacuation of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But let it remain until it is dead, and then you will leave it, or it will tear itself apart.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is yellowish in color and the root is subtle, and you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first check if the abscess is healed and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	And then place the patient in front of the sun, and their head should be in good condition, and they open their mouth and chew on the thong between their hands, and press the tongue evenly all over the instrument, so that its form is like this.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or gold as fine as a needle's point:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Press the tongue to all this instrument, and see the aposteme, if you take the onion and the leaf in the antelope, and the thread will be longer than you think.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and take no thing from the tapestry with, then the copper to the instrument, of which it seems like some force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and the head is corked, and one part goes to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or copper.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if the cope has spikes, then its form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be turned over on one side and the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	When you have seized one of the ankles, if you also seize the other in the same manner, and after making the incision, gargle the patient's mouth with hot, warm, and soothing water, and let them rest until the pain comes, if you gargle the patient's mouth with hot water, or cook the pome granates, or mirte fuelles, and similar things, as long as the patient is not chilled.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then continue the cure until it is healthy.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And no other abscesses ever appear in the throat except for the two ankles, if they are seized and treated like the two ankles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with a small-sensory wound that was in her throat, which means it was not serious.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had closed almost the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked channel, and could not drink or urinate, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the wound was so high that it had been set with two incisions through the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I then operated, and found in the one the bone, then removed it, and took out a large portion of the bowel.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then removed another part from the other side, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After cutting the gallbladder according to these instructions, and removing a part of it, and there will only be a small amount of blood.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And the woman's throat is torn out, and she begins to drink water and then wine, and does not stop cutting at that wound for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the wound healed over, and filled the empty joint that I had emptied for dinner, until it refused to take in anything large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore, I engaged and cauterized the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	It did not take long to heal.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I will begin from these parts, and I will only make God do as I have done after me.
de l’uve	Of the urethra
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the woman comes down to the uterus, it is long and thin, and is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is too large and round, it is called "uterus".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, you see that the abscess is calmed, and it is subleased, then you can copy it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And that which is round and assembled is not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And it is blood or blackish-colored or black, then you can evacuate the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is therefore, as you see, according to the manner I have said, of the woman's girdle and her age, that you should make the midwife stand before the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we have made in front of it.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then clean the wound in the uterus, and cut the tissue, and the copper we have said in the incision of the two breasts.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the natural termination.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cover more, you will grieve to the voice and to the speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two thumbs, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of pain, then you must use an engine for the fire cautery of the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cautery is sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And the patient should place his head on the device we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and then press the tongue with the instrument, and confuse it with hot vinegar if it is not too thick or too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using this instrument, of course, its form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And if the head has a hair or puts medicine, as the hair of a pin, and places the instrument at all the medicine under the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	When the patient has a dislocated shoulder, if the saliva and spittle flow from the mouth due to the medicine given, if it does not descend to the throat and chin,
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the wound, as much as you see the flow and the sting of the medicine is relieved;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and tie the instrument with all the cotton in the gut, as much as the cotton sticks to the wound;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this as often as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and check after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you are a practitioner of medical cauterization, if it reoccurs, and after the cauterization, cleanse the flesh around the urethra with a cork, and clean what is outside of the medical area.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is inflamed with cold water, and be sure to use gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This remedy is safer than the incision alone, just the cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take a lump of salt, pepper, oregano, rue, chamomile, and thyme, and mix them all together or any of them in one pot, and put on fire, and boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and it may be well stuck with strong earth, and if it does not hold, have an instrument made according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	and it should be made of silver or gold, and one of the ends should be inserted in the patient's mouth as much as possible until the vapor rises through the nose, until the nose is numb.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the vapor restarts often, until the nose is dry and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, as more things can come.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and only do this when the onset of the abscess has declined.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a needle and insert the head of the screw into a crack in the bone, if the mouth of the patient does not have too much pain.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the screw crack does not cause pain in the mouth, and it is a good cure together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it has happened in the throat, either an arrow or a fish spine, or nothing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore, if you must try this, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments, so that you see the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And if it does not open you, then you must make the patient vomit, unless the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	If by chance the thing is done through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of millet, or a morsel of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and then it binds to the sponge and then glues together;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the shoulder, if it is loose, and then tighten and hold fast;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come loose from what we have said, then use the instrument of thrust according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be hinged at the head if it can enter more lightly into the mouth, and have the head raised above.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And be warned that if you do not touch the epigastrium, all will not survive, and neither should you overcrowd the bones.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is better that the patient and the tool be used, because it is needed or the thing is urgent.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the thing is not cut, or it is not pulled out evenly throughout the entire tool, as far as it goes.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat of the mouth
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Never has medicine been without its remedies, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And if this does not help, then look in the patient's mouth at the sun, then press the patient's tongue to the instrument I have given you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the lance, if it has all its small hairs, or if it has subtle needles that are worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If it is not worth anything, then take a hair from the head, and put it in the mouth of the patient, then pull or cut the hair with the forceps, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's scalp is scabbed all over every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then fill me with cold liquid, and operate on the mouth, and the throat feels like it's being swallowed, and it moves to my hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the tongue feels the cold liquid, then it is done.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not move as we have said, then the surgeon should submerge the mouth in asafetida powder using the instrument I mentioned during the fumigation of the urethra.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will feel numb.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the fumigation is if you preign it or if there are charcoal bits, and it should be covered with a covering sheet in a clean place, and in that pertus the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then pour the fumigation on it, and the patient places the tip of the tail in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but goes into the wound.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And the wound will now hurt, and if it does not stop, then repeat the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And the patient suffers from thirst, and drinks salty and acidic things, and does not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And therefore, this is the best way to relieve the patient according to this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which you treat the wound, if it can be seen, resembles combs that can enter the mouth.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it seems like a tool for the beak of care, and it has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it touches, it cannot hold.
et vez ci la forme:	And then its form is like this:
li chapistres des apostemes	2. The cauteries for the abscesses:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	The appearances of abscesses are, according to which memory comes after one another in this book, and they are different in perforation and size.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And it is in two ways that one is itself in its appearance, and because it is moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is by the hands or when they are at the core.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the wounds of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the wounds on the face are different from those that come in joints, and each person will have their own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if an abscess does not have to be measured, as long as the bowel is dead according to its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	If it is of such a kind that one must perceive when they are about to be born, and they do not die until their completion, as if amputations of joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when wounds come from joints, and they are left as they are until they are fully healed, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	If the amputation is of the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	If it is of the foundation, then if one does not pierce when it is dead, it will harm the foundation.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is only necessary to pierce the amputation when it is thought to be complete with digestion, as if the foundation, which would not harm the principal member, would not be cut off, and would be long-lasting, and a fistula would be formed.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot be cured in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you suture the wound of the abscess that is inflamed according to its completion, and when the pain is relieved, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and the healing of the wound, and the debilitated condition and ague of the abscess, and the other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you check the wound or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and if the wound is long and deep, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and arteries, and in some places there is no plastering.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those cases, according to the member, they.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, if it is large, you should leave the puncture as long as it is confirmed in digestion completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you do not heed this, then the heart will be far from you, and it will be bitter to despise excrement.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance they harden their lips and make them more beautiful for him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is punctured according to the large corse, according to the member, which the members can bear.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you use small incisions, small punctures.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large incisions, large punctures, and numerous furrows according to the appearance of the size of the incision.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such incisions or they must be made deep, and covered.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become as soft as I am, and is worn out, then it is necessary to do as we do with bubbles.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	If it is of those that are cut at three angles, and if it is of those that are coped as the thorn of the myrtle, and like the gouts of angers.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And if it is of those that are made in a single cut, and others in different sizes and shapes.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, if the cut is superficial like an abrasion, then it must be pierced gently.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the cut is large and has a thick bow, and it pierces, if you do not draw all the bow in that hour, but draw a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then comes the aposteme, just like the other day, and no proper thing is done.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	I do this again and again, as long as the bowel is full.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	However, if the man is of weak will, or a woman carries, or eats pets, or old men are in decay.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectoration there is no time with the end of the bowel, that by chance dies the patient, and you do not know it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived the aposteme, if the wound bleeds, and look at whether the wound of the aposteme is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a flat one, then use linen or cotton threads.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it is many abscesses, and he has a fever, then you should make tents in each one so that they do not meet against each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have treated an abscess with some leather, and it has healed, then you should fill it with fine cloth or the rough side of a linen cloth that is not moist, and the limb will be well.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone, and the care of the ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the evacuation of blood occurs in your work, if it is cold and wet, and you become dizzy, and then your arm hangs down, and you must hold it in place many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the patient persists in losing blood, and he has good governance and care, and the powders I mentioned in my hands are in this book, and if it is not feverish, and the abscess is painful, then you should make tents and drape them with wet cloths soaked in wine and olive oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. If this is the case, and the patient's skin is wet, either with water or olive oil, or wine and olive oil, as we have said before, then...
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove the stitch and the pus, if necessary, as soon as it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is how to completely understand all treatments for sutures:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or have you been told what to do before the treatments for sutures, and then read this chapter.
des soros	of sore
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the heads of many abscesses come and are like ours, as if it were a grape, and they have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	It has thick and long hairs or hair, and it is moist as well as that of a pig.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And if they are thick and rough at the haircut, and there is no doubt that it will not hurt, then it does not matter.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the cutting of the size if it is that you spree with all the instruments called "entronomer", whether the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they are made by cutting too long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is seen, it is better to shave the hair that contains the moisture, because it will return to its place when left alone.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, use warm and wet, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when one comes across something that is not well known.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then the cotton begins again, as before, the second day, and the limb, as long as you see that it does not cause pain all night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment according to what is convenient, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds fat, then the graft according to this form, long.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And if your bones get wet, and scar all over, and put all of your care in drawing the dressing for the wound where it grows.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	If the artery is pushed against it, then I will do what I have said after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	2. And if the aposteme is too tight, and it is cut and treated as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	3. And the tailor makes the aposteme too tight and wet, if it is lighter, because there are not many veins.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if in any of these abscesses or gashes, and of these that I have cut from an old woman's thigh;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess like a gash, sharp and sore, and could not be cut;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if we had made no abscess, we would have made a wound as good as a gash;
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming, let these which come from the children and roots of the ears be opened as soon as possible, for it is the most dependent part of the body, to relieve the belly;
et les cure si com il covient.	and they cure as it is fitting.
des scrophules	Of scrofuly (a term used to refer to
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	There are often times of abscess at the collarbone, and the screws come loose, and the wounds, and never any other part is hurt, and they heal, and one bone is joined to another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And every scrofula is properly located on its side, just as the wound and the abscess are on the cheek, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	The patient has to remove the items that contain moisture, and if they are not willing to follow the advice for health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in the one that you see in good arrangement at the temple, and is similar to the color of the cheek, and uniform in all parts and is not rough as nerves are, nor in the artery nor in the conductor, and is not rough.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if you decide to cut it with scissors, and burn in every part, and the lips are like claws, if you can handle it, as we have said about the cheek.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And the tailor makes it small and small, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and not to tear, that the hands do not slip, and do not see too far ahead, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol or some powders that stick to the wound, or any poultices that stop bleeding, and pull the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be as long as the swelling is relieved and the wound is softened, and perspire.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	When the dislocation is not reduced, if it returns to your care, as soon as you manage to reduce it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then wonder if your patient suffers from a few small scrofula, such as the cope and the mund.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if the patient has a root cause of the scrofula being large, then you must only remove that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and leave it to hang, without causing any harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then use the wound of fine cotton plunged in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, it is necessary to assemble the two lips of the wound, and then sew now, before there is no excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and cut it off, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofula that hold superfluity, if they are pressed or cut open, will die.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And the point is like the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then try different treatments with care and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is being saved from corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well-healed, if the cure with ointment causes scarring, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the scalp
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the lengthening of the neck.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I have never seen anyone do this in our world, and it is the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	To those who have squinting, it is necessary that the fenestra of the neck called "epiglotis" be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And none can help this one because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected by those who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the groin.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it with three or four small incisions, passing through the two circles or along the quantity of the incision, and not into the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And they see that it is not possible to cut the epigastrium without causing pain, and the veins are long and difficult to find.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	If the masters are unable to handle it, then it comes to extending the neck skin to all the bones, then cutting as far as it reaches the cheek.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid the veins of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the skin, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the section of the swollen cheek that it was forced to jump by the shoulder that was broken, and due to the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound overhanging a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed, if it is doubted that the extraction is not possible, gather the two lips of the wound as far as the cheek, and cut through until you feel the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that make the patient healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that nothing should be done until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is near death, and the lack of air is severe.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then keep the epigastrium warm because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and it is kept alive.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And because the ancients advised leaving the wound overgrown until the disease had passed, and it had passed in three days or four, they then ordered to suture and dress the wound, as soon as it was dressed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I see that a maiden was cutting her hair, and she had parted the front of her hair, and took some of the dark curls.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I was called to cure him, and I found him already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that flowed from it, and although she did not have any veins or lead the way but only the gore, it was due to the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and saw the wound, and cured it as soon as it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and she did not come to the damsel until she was red of voice, and returned afterwards to her place.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I say that in the tailoring of the epigastric there is no pain.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large maw
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These hernias are called "throat hernia" and are large hernias of the color of a yarn, and are very common in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	and there are two ways to treat it:
naturez, et accidens;	1. The first sentence translates to: "When a bone is fractured due to an accident or injury.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	2. The second sentence translates to: "Nature has no mechanism for healing such injuries.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	3. The third sentence translates to: "Injuries can occur in two ways: either they resemble large wounds, or they are similar to amputations that come from arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	4. The fourth sentence translates to: "If there is no bleeding, and it is not possible to stop it with a small forceps, the surgeon should look for an alternative method.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	5. The fifth sentence translates to: "If the surgeon cannot stop the bleeding with a large forceps, and it does not stop, just like when we cut ourselves, the wound should be cleaned thoroughly, if necessary.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	1. And he cuts well throughout, and the cure is done as it should be, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	The first sentence to translate is
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	1. There are many ways to us, which I will describe all the appearances.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	1. and it is necessary that I make a clear distinction between wound and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	1. I say that dislocation is inflammation and fever holding, as long as the ebullitions have passed and the secretion has been accomplished.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	1. And then the fever and inflammation rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	1. With the wound having no inflammation, fever, or pain, and containing ichthyin, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the corset, and becomes like a pimple, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	1. They are according to two appearances, either sharp or blunt, or moist, and of different colors, as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you examine and first inquire about all the instruments called "entromissoire" according to what appears in the chapter after the work.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	2. The manner of incising the abscesses of the nose is that you prick it more with your finger than with a needle, and turn your two fingers often until you feel that the skin has given way, then that is according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	3. Then draw out the entromiser, and hold tight until it gives way;
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	4. If the abscess is moist, cut it according to its color, as I said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	After the entrenchment, if there is no moisture, it is fat and if you make it a cross, take it with pliers, and lightly scrape each part and wipe the wound with the nail;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you do not make it clean, if you take it in pieces so that nothing comes out.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing comes out, it will return to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it drains a pouch, and does not grieve you, use the wound with some corrosive powders, close the wound, and put soothing ointments on the incision, and cure other wounds as long as it is healthy.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it is large, then we will cut the two lips of the wound, and treat the one who is causing the pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	If the vein is battered and it is against or otherwise, if you hasten and use the leech of vitriol broth, and leave it for II to III hours, as long as the wound is burning, and rest the inflammation of blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to the compass that it is not too much out.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See the forms of the entangled protrusions, and are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large and moldy and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three kinds that are called "alabar" and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	To prevent dislocation, one must first grasp the head of the shoulder with a firm grip, using a small movement to avoid causing further injury. This is done to securely hold onto the fistula's openings.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	They are similar to the beaks of birds, which are counted in gold, silver, or copper, and are more valued if they are yellow, and are more skilled at grasping the fistula openings than black ones.
et sont de III manieres:	They come in three different ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the abscess.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the tumors are quite varied, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	The first sentence translates to: "Great, means, and small ones.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	The second sentence translates to: "And if there are those who have two eyes of three kinds?
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	The third sentence translates to: "And if there are those who have three eyes and they are of three kinds?
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	The fourth sentence translates to: "And if there are those who have two eyes and one eye only, and they are of three kinds?
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The fifth sentence translates to: "And these are necessary for their healing.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The sixth sentence translates to: "The head of these we make very sharp, and such ones are those that cannot cut through flesh, because one does not touch the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these intramuscular injections, the aliments are returned in handcuffs, so that the patient does not escape from the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and slow, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	but only use them in the joints of the legs, arms, and hands, and the fingers, and in similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and no other instrument is ever made that resembles the forceps of scissors, according to this form, and it is not cut:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed on none at all times in the shoulder that can withstand the pressure of the veins and arteries, and never returns to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	No time have the hands of some men swollen when they are in great pain, as if they were hands of women:
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	1. And the lame and swollen ones, and those who see them cured, if they come to agree with this form of this line: b. until g:.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	2. Then scorch the fat, and apply the wound with a hot needle, then stitch the lips of the wound as close as possible, and cure it until it is healthy.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	3. And if the wound is inclined, and is widened for its growth, as it is in women, if they are made into stitches, through the similar twists.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	4. And if one holds onto the other at the end of each and every one, if the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, up to this line g. until g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the skin that is between the second lips is burned, and the fat is removed, and what we have said about sewing and powders is carried out, and what is necessary for the cure, as long as it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not rest, or due to the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it as long as it drains the discharge and fat, then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	Of the abscesses of the horseshoes
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The abscesses that come from the horseshoes are made of hard scrophulous or have corners, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, along the line .b., and then along the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bone in the abscess is visible, use a piece of clean cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat with ointment as needed until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	When the patient's response resembles scabs, if it is like we have said in our descriptions of scabs, and the wound is not deep, then apply a cauterization as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is pricked, and the blood flows out, if it happens many times, and also the vein bleeds;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if the patient has pain when it is the artery, if it pricks the vein;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and if you feel pain in your hand, if you hold it steady;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and if it is for the vein, if it is pulled out;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to stop the bleeding, and at the same time when it is loosened and the bands and buttons are broken and the guts and the inside of the body, and it is greatly hurt;
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is made of entangled arteries by being cut through the skin long.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work the size as the bones, and beautifully cut the artery of the tendons, as much as it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then sew it with a needle, and make it pierce on the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in it, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then, if the leg that is between the second and third joints of an instrument is not released when it is inserted, and there is no dislocation, then release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then, if the cure does not fit well enough to hold the bow, then...
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then, if the cure is applied to this wound, then...
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is large enough to cover the vein, then... do this: grasp the abscess with your hand, remove it from the limb you are holding in your hand, and cut the thread with the other hand, and make sure there are two strings, so that you take it off from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the suture, if I may, or one of the two parts of the second part of the two heads of the hair.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the threads will not hold, then replace another needle at the end of all the thread and draw out the threads through all the sutures at the first needle's end, and draw them tight in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then pull the suture as much as the excess will allow, then pull the excess from the end and leave what is left.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a wet cloth to the wound and oil it, and treat it with tent boards and bandages as much as it is necessary.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	When the fire cautery is instructed to the patient, apostes come from the artery and vein, come apostes from nerves when they are too tight or due to excessive work, and similar things occur.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with helpers and you must do it in all joints, and it is an injury, and its color resembles the color of a wounded heart, and it is more commonly found in positions that cause pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is held steady, if it feels pain, and it is not from a wounded heart but from the curvature of the neck, then...
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it remains still for all purposes, and does not move before or after, nor is it dislocated, and the one who is in joints cannot be moved without force.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance, it may contract.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And the one who is head or face, makes the hide at the stump.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, and it is held with nails, and the poultice is applied to its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, and the gout spreads to the bone, and the flesh burns, then the bone assembles the wound at the seam, and the cure is done as soon as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	Large hanging jaws
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	There is no time in the womb and does not affect any other part, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance, and it is at the root, and the head is large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and it has small and large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I have seen one who had them in his belly, and the ones that were more like fungus than anything else, and they had no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and they were sharp, and they corroded and turned moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I found them and weighed one XVIII ounces, and the other VI. The incisions are made if you look at whether the bones are moist, and the color of the tool is bluish-green and moist with a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the chisel is used on the larger bone, and it is in your presence, then perform the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For the mason comes often too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not want to cauterize, then you must cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the tool spreading and coming out of the incision, then take a piece of thread well made, and tie the tool as we have said, and leave it alone.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then comes the restraint, and do not stop straining the rope as long as it holds the anchor, and check it by its sense of work.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, if it is not painful in the belly, but you hold it well on both sides, then burn it so it does not regrow.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and hold the throat which is of rough touch, dark color, and poor sensation, and cold liquid.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted ulcers, and I will come to treat this sore after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the gout is severe
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	When the appearance of the bowels comes from cauterization of the wound or cutting of sauce, and it is under the belly and in some of the bowels, if as in other cases, or of sweat which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of ventositeit.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the rupture of the skin and the exit of pus, if the color of the aposteme resembles the color of the heart, and it is a light thing that causes pain, and has multiple exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	When it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, if it returns, and by chance if it becomes swollen, and enlarges at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is light and opens well when you press it with your hand; do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it opens if the aposteme is large and hard, and is torn according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to varicose veins, if it swells at the base, and the vein appears to be due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or varicose veins.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it comes to pass that you allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of cauterizations for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is from the intestine or the anus, then it comes that you command the patient to touch his tail, and it should be stretched all around, then spread throughout the entire feces.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command the patient to hold their breath between your hands, then draw the limb you have set aside throughout the entire joint, then half of the abscess is located at the end of the large muscle.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then draw it through a strong thread or a firm cord, or it will be difficult to remove.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work the half of the abscess stretched on the thread, and you will find your indication, and it indicates the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you catch the dislocation, if it does not stay in place, and cut into the intestine through the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you catch the dislocation, if it is caught in the hip, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery is torn against, or the vein, if it comes out easily, then return to your work and take two hooks, and cut the two ends as you think you will see.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then stain the abscess with four leeches, and if you see, take out the leeches, and let the wound remain as long as it bleeds, and the dead flesh will fall off.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	If you catch it when it is subtle and perforated, then the treatment of what it causes, and keep the wound clean as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and remove the blood or mucus that you draw, then clean the wound of what it covers, and dry the wound.
dou chancre	The translation of "dou chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division about the appearances of a gumma, and commented that one should oversee by means of drugs, and commented that one must use iron for the cure.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And let us say that the gumma is formed in the marsh, and great caution is required in its cure, and they tell the ancient that when gums are in the leg or cannot be removed if it is like a gum in the mammillary glands, and in the crevices, and in similar places, and it must be treated throughout until it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	When it is large and old, if you only manage to approach it, for I have never seen a cure.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one has ever been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the wounds, when they are in the body or can be opened, as we have said, is that you never cleanse the surgeon with black collar;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make it healthier if it has clearly overflowed, then cut the surgeon with the knife to make the wound;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then your bones or gums will become wet, and all the hair will leave, and the bone will leave nothing left;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and leave the blood flowing freely, and hold the wound tightly in your hand or at nothing, and if they dislocate the blood makes it opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, if the cauterized so that the without being stained.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the second treatment as soon as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division of the appearances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only elected.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch iron in these two appearances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore, when you treat this condition of ydropsis called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, if you look at whether the patient's constitution is weak, or if there is another disease than ydropsis, then like all other stomach and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one does not touch iron, because it has doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is of great constitution, and has only ydropsis, and is not too young nor too old, then it is necessary to oversee:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	1. Gently place the patient's shoulder in your hands, and apply firm pressure to the abdomen at the lowest part of the hip, then take the spatula with this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And then comes the second sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	2. Point the spatula and make a small incision if it goes in but not far enough to reach the intestine when you remove it, and do not bleed.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	3. Then look to see if the dislocation is towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	4. If you must cut through the skin, do so directly above the bone, not too far to the side.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	5. If the dislocation is due to liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the bone.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	If it is due to muscle tension, and it is on the left side, and only the surgeon's skill can straighten the shoulder that the superfluities do not flow towards the weak part of the body.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then, pierce all the hide with the instrument, and the blade, and gently press your hand on every part of the skin between the hide and the face as if scraping with the quantity of an nail or an entree.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then, pierce the face as far as the skin is pulled towards the shoulder, and it is the axe that cuts, then the thread is removed, and this instrument is of the form like this.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a silver needle, and is of lead or light iron, and in its part closest to the tip, there is a small pore.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and sometimes costs on one part, three pores.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two more parts, and one more.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and it is cut like a pen point, and it is in the shape of the incision that the scribes make for the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the head of the shoulder is the aliment, so that when it is tightened, if the instrument comes to the edge, then it should now be inserted with the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	if you see that it is not enough to fill the third part, because if you see more than it should in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or if he has palpitations, or if he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But according to its quantity of virtue, and according to the dispositions of the virtue of the patient's shoulder, and his pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then take the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now by the heat that is on the pulse that was under the scarlet fever which I spoke of, because I want you to do it this way.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then continue the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small amount of needle.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this every day, and keep yourself from twisting as much as you can, but only a little needle.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	If you doubt the patient's condition and leave them in doubt, if the cure of the grave or sandbank is affected, and by means of drinking or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes hot;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the use of drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterization on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the worms, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the growth
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is ever born without having a pustule in the growth, or if it is small, or if it is not present in its root.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the patient insists so much that they cannot perceive any slight subtlety according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put or sew a small stitch under the cloth, and tie and cut in three or four days or eight, and if it sees that it is passing urine, then if it is closed, make urine, and then put it back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance they do not cover it, because the urine that comes out is not closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the part where the swelling is small, if it is treated with a piece of cloth as described, as we have said, if it expands.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the purse in their thigh are bleeding, because no one has ever had the purse at the top of the thigh, for they cannot urinate before they cut off their thigh.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot ejaculate because the matter does not come out quite to the end, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way of the work is that if the patient cries on his back, it is the thigh of the thigh and the cut is as big as the size of a penis, if the purse is cut, so it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep away from blood loss that comes often, and if it happens, if the wound is infected, and treat the wound as soon as it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules of the throat.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often come to the throat, and it appears as a bad appearance;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and in some are malicious and not malicious;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	If you want to burn them in the subcutaneous fat, and cut and clean all, then put fine cotton in Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care of ointment diagnosis as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, with a dark color and painful, then you must use cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have closed it, and the skin is still wet, and has parts of hair and parts bare, if it comes that you need to reopen it.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is dry, if the cure is done.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you close it together, if you do not secure the skin of the wound that it is not perceived, and darkness and corruption come to the skin of the wound and on its edges.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If all that is black and corrupted comes out, then apply honey and flour made from the scraps of green peaches and vines, then continue with other treatments as it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood flow stops, then follow this form of the fire cautery:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	1. The fire cautery can help with these positions:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	2. It is known to help with the evacuation of blood and corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	3. If the head of the shoulder is corrupted and needs to be reinserted, it is best to hold onto the verge with one hand and use a noose with the other to pull it back in, and if necessary, release the pain with urine.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	4. If the hairs of the head of the shoulder grow towards these who have not been circumcised, or those who have been injured or castrated, then it is necessary to scrape them off with the instrument, as long as the hair is loose and the head of the verge is released from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a difficult matter to devise, then it comes that you scarify it with a spatula of no particular size of the hair and the beard.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then apply a element between the two, and I put a fine cloth of wool that is cold and moist on it, so it does not stick.
de la circoncision	Of the circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not the most difficult wounds to continue if they are like the others.
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	whenever we do this work of our will, and in truth as children, if it is the best work that we can do, and the lighter for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not call circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I want the greatest part of the masters and physicians who performed circumcisions on the male child, and they had force, and at all ages.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it were possible to cut the hair, and by chance if one cuts more than is necessary, and then one cuts more to make up for it.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or they may return, and there is great pain, and at circumcision which is not surely done on the point of the painful member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And at the circumcision of the penis by chance the iron escapes, and cuts the urethra, and many times are born without any means of circumcision, and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the circumcision made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the forces cut both the good and the bad equally.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if it fits evenly in its place,
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the fingers be well tightened around the glove.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and if the manner is first, as if the child understands, that you only tighten the thread around the glove, and then I will do it in all the ways you please.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then I will do it straight between your hands, and repost the strengths between your hands or out of your fingers that the child does not see, nor any of the strings.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then hold your hand to the glove and blow or suck, and pull it up as long as the head of the glove is not in place.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	1. Then clean well the waste that is assembled, 2. then tie the leg with a double thread, 3. then tie it loosely to the other line.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	1. Then tie it with the second thread to the pouch and the indicator, 2. place it between the two loops, 3. then gently pull on the handle quickly and cut the end of the thread.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	1. Then leave the vein loose for a moment, as it is evil.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Then put powder on it and on the powder, 2. then cut a piece of bread and dip it in cooked meat broth that has been cooled with rose water, olive oil, and salt, 3. then place it on the other side, and care for it as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces at the mundification if this is:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The heads should be thin and even, and as strong as the right hand consistently.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of mundification if it is when the teeth come out at the incision.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must stretch it to your nail, unless the tooth causes apoplexy.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And the crown should be even, and if you do not hold it to your nail, then the crown will have sharp points, and then the crown.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they exceed three years, and what is out of order is bent, if it is left until the apoplexy is calmed, and lightly burned.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If the copse is as you say it is, and you keep hold of the part of the bark, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure the joint of things soft wounds with powder, which we have said or treated as powders, and if it does not heal quickly, it will become worse, unless it is helped.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure the wound as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	The second line of the text translates to: "Hold back the urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine if it is of opiliation of the urethra, or of sanguination of the incision, or of bowels, or of cholestatic jaundice, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra which is at the hip or the neck of the bladder, then it comes to pass that the patient's health is endangered.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And it is placed on the back and extended over the abdomen from the part below the back, and the patient's pain is limited as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And therefore the lower abdomen is constrained to the expression of the urethra below, because the urine is discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it comes to pass that you administer an extraction of all the instrument called "syringe", and its form is.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let silver subtly lighten the hair, as if it were the tail of a swallow.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the girth be that of a palm tree of long and half, and let it be lightened at the root.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the urine's exit if it is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the root of the hair or linen, and cut the root of the hair with a double thread of silk.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the superfluity of the hair and tie the root of the thread with the thorn of the ring, then anoint the ring with oil or balsam and ointment of urine and olive oil and German tea, and make the patient sit on the seat and the verge of the bladder wet and oiled and ointed with olive oil and German tea.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently place the thread at the edge, as it reaches the root of the leaf, then fold the leaf inwards towards the vein.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then pull the thread before it reaches the vein, and feel the patient's pain when it comes into contact with the empty thing, and this is done according to this order because either the guide or the patient will be harmed.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then the thread is pulled through all the hair, and the urine follows the hair, then it is drawn out and the urine is made up.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the thread as soon as the vein is empty and the patient is healed.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scald or blood comes into the bladder, or when there is purulent discharge and you see water and medicines being distilled, then make sure to cleanse all the instrument called "clepsieder", and it is in this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	The woman is closed, and if there is third degree burns:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	If one part is second degree and the other first degree, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the patient feels better because the corticosteroids are such that they make the wound feel well without addition, if one can treat the moisture and bind when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medications in the bladder, put the head of the castor oil in the moisture and take the one who is nearest.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you take the moisture with castor oil and then tightly bind the one who is nearest.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters the bladder and comes to the urethra now, if the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And it is the form of a subtle cauterization where one cauterizes the uterus:
si est ci:	If it is there:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or gold, and it is at the head;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and it is not used on the skin or the lips;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you have seen cauterized on it, then place it between the two breasts to form a double-walled tube, and heat that moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then cut the subtle cauterization in the edge, then hold your hand on the bladder as much as the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have a vessel, then take a piece of sponge, and make a circle, and drill it round the hole.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then force the thick wire through these wounds, then assemble the circle as we do with a nail, and fill it with oil, water, and vinegar, and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And make it as you made the vessel, pressing with your hand until the water reaches the vessel.
de la piere	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the division of the ways of incising, and the assembly of medicines.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between the incision in the leg and the other signs, and in what size we should over it.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder and the gullet;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and thoroughly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the pierce in the bladder that often occurs in children is a sign that the inflammation of the bladder has passed and is now subtle.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and if it opens the gullet, and grates the gullet, and it can be done many times, and then it becomes inflamed.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the mouth of these frequent pierces.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the treatment of children is light until they are four years old, and it is bitter in the belly, and it is as bitter as gall, for those who are between the belly and the stomach.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the cure is less severe for those with large wounds than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to the cure, if we first clean the patient with chalk, we will treat all the feces that are inside the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never presses on the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient upright and move them to the bed, if the wound descends to the anus, and does not once rise above the groin.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then place the patient in your hands, with their hands below their knees, if the anus is all inclined downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then cut the cloth and touch it.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the wound in the process of cutting, stop immediately and re-cut the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	If she does not touch anything at all, if your index finger is wet with oil from the left hand, or if it is dirty, then the patient's hand is misshapen.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And the bone in its base, and wants to pierce, and when you feel it with your finger, if the pain is at the top of the thigh.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press with your finger, and the bone in its base, or where you see it being cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the thigh with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand with the fingers upwards, and with his left hand to grasp the bone that is exposed at the site where the cut was made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he binds the splint, but if it is not firm, then this is its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And they make between the one who is between the coils and the foundation, not in the environment but at the cost of the right side of the nape.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And it should be above the incision, and your hands should be either on the foundation or at the root, and the tail should be wide enough so that it is not too large, and the stitching should be tightened, according to the size of the incision, not too many.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the pressure if the one who is at the foundation, that it jump for work.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and you check if it has a piece of piercing or angles, and margins:
si est griés a issir;	If it is gripped to exit;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if a part that is wet appears as a gland, it swells, and its exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	If a celi therefore has angles and margins, make the size larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not stick, then you must hold the needles that are like a nail at the head, and pull on them until the piercing does not slip.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	Or if you break the instrument sharp spur at the head.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you do not break it in, then open the loosened part and if it is not cracked, then pull on it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are more punctures, if the first one is the largest at the top of the bladder, then cut it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones if they have more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is left large, it will become greater, and cause a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things come to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	If it dies or the urine comes out through the urethra because the one who reads cannot hold it in.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But try to draw or cut it with nails, as much as you can draw it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, if you use the wound of cinnamon and aloe and dragon's blood, and stretch it, and wrap it with soft cloth in oil and vinegar, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the stinging pain;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then wrap the patient's neck with a cloth, and do not let the tie slip from the jaw.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you dislocate it, if the joint is well lubricated with oil and sage, then apply the ointment of finicking and basil, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if aphthae appear in the wound and corrosions, and the blood vessels in the vein are frozen, and this is due to the retention of urine, which is held in a certain way that does not cause it to rise with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then bind your thigh in the wound, and extract the blood, because if it remains, it will flow into the vein, and cause inflammation.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound of the head and neck, and help it in all ways that you know, as long as it is healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And make sure that all the remedies you use, that you bind the thighs, and gather the medicines at the knee.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	If the prick is small, and it is conducted by the finger, and it is felt, and the urine cannot be discharged.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the cure I am giving does not help, you should measure it many times, this is an exception to the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have this proof in mind.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will prepare to follow this form and make it at a 30-degree angle on the first side.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take your finger and press it on the other side of the prick, so that it does not go into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then gently bite the skin on the other side of the prick until it reaches the prick.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the bite in your hand at the prick as often as you can feel the prick from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If much urine comes, then press your hand on the part that is becoming loose due to the piercing.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks, and falls with the urine, and the member becomes tight.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you do not manage to do this for anything, then cut off the end of the piercing and the other, then make the wound end where the piercing is between the two ligaments, then it will come out, and cut off the remaining ligament, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it as soon as it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the women's incision
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	1. A wound comes when a piercing is infected in women, and if it has never happened, it is due to the grief of the surgeon, and is defended by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	1. One is that by chance the woman is virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	1. The second is that it is not often found a woman well-bred who has been disfigured by wounds, even when she is young;
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	1. And the third way is that if by chance one cannot find a woman well-bred in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	1. And the fourth way is that if by chance the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it requires a more perfect size, and great pain it causes. And if it becomes necessary to set it, then choose a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, then cut it yourself, and if you cannot cut it, then do not cast the woman in shame;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	The present sentence describes a wise practice for women in life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what you command in the investigation of the wound.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look well if the woman is virgin.
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	and it is necessary to put her in her place or foundation and seek the wound.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she is pregnant, if she is constrained to lose her place, and the midwife recommends that she put her in her place or cut with the knife, and wants and presses her left hand on the vesica.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she is pregnant, if it is necessary to move her great by little by little from the entrance of the vesica until she reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then follow the incision at the root of the thigh, in the damp environment, where it is most likely to be found, and it feels the pain in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move its two dogs from the wound or the hole, and is of small size at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then cut off the skin in that size, if you feel the wound so tight that the hole can be pushed out, and know that many ways of holes exist.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and curved, and those that have joints.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you wish to know the appearance to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you do not want to kill it, then put glass beads in the wound, and hold it for an hour until it is not inflamed.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, until the wound is healed, and have bandages as I told you in the extraction of the piercing to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if it does not heal, and it is the artery that is covered, then take the powder on the shoulder and stretch it out many times, and do not continue this, and leave the wound and do not touch it, as a chance the patient may die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the pain from the wound is alleviated and you read it, if it returns to your care, as long as the wound is not fully healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Wet dressings are nothing more than assemblies of moisture or white soap, which are made from the urine of the cow, which contains the urea.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And is called "si fac," and never properly in the thread of the eye, if one takes care that it is not another tool;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the white skin between the "si fac" we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and there was nothing else.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramification if it is faulty that comes as coins, and it is expanded that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it come from percussion on the skin, and this moisture is of many colors;
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is declining color to jaune, or without red, or black, or white water, and this comes more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to conclude this assembly, for if it is white "si fac" we have mentioned, then the wounds are long if they look like that of an eye, and it does not open the pores, because it has moisture everywhere;
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	If it has moisture in its own cloth, if the wound is cleaned with a piece of the udder, and for this they think it is other ointments.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if the moisture is between the hide of the thighs and the white suet, it is well perceived.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, if it is sprinkled throughout the introducer, because it is formed in front of you.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the cautery, judge which one is denser.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cut with iron, it comes to pass that the patient is healthy according to our power and the fullness of his chest.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then the sow on its back, with something high on one side, and puts its mouth down to the cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	If the patient's side is injured, and orders the minister to cut on the opposite side, and extends the scalpel to one of the two second ribs closest to the kidneys.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, and cut the skin between the long ribs until you reach the point of the nipple, and make sure your fingers are completely on the skin of the rib, and gently scrape it with the blade of the knife until you see blood;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the skin of the neck at the large abscess, and remove all the pus, and then put your fingers in, and expand the hole;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the knee of the patient, but only the suture.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	copy everything or by pieces immediately the costeit of him subtle, that if you do not know how to copy it well, then the pain will return to him.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the knee jumps further during your work, then reset it in the joint as soon as you have completed the stitching with the suture.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then assemble the two sides of the knee with a stitch, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the knee corrupted by another disease, then release the veins that are suspended, doubting the drainage of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cope the coin on all the suspender, and draw out the umbilicus, and cure as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And when it is swollen, it is assembled into two parts, which are the branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you cope the other part as you have done the first dislocation, then take out the blood, and put ointment of olive oil in the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another soft linen in vinegar and oil, and put on the two coins, and tie double cloths, and lay it on all the part according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take the cloths, and use the laced linen according to this appearance and they should be assembled by sewing in the gusset of the pants, and one of the heads prays on the back, and the other on the part that is pointed.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two heads of the second incision, and it should be all assembled in the loop of the bow.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never has medicine been this difficult for this ram's cauterization in the size of iron, and that you prescribe the subtle cultivator of cauterization, and shave the hide of the calves, and it should be washed as we have said, if that the white sweat that contains the ague is discovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce that white sweat with the claws, and burn at this subtle cauterization.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And you will succeed in all ways that you can think of, as long as you try everything.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And make sure the fire does not touch the uterus.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And be assured that this work is more beneficial.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And be careful not to lose blood, and be cautious with the size of the opening.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if nothing contradicts you, or abscesses form or blood loss occurs, or something else, treat what is causing the contradiction according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is unresponsive, and does not wait for this operation due to its horror, if it causes perforation, as I have said, and you are sure that after understanding the meanings we have mentioned, that this is the case, then fix the patient on his side with his legs raised;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Because the throat pierces the wide part of all the surrounding flesh, and makes a long incision in the chest.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and if the wound is large, then all the inflammation will follow.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put a piece of cloth on the head, tie it, and leave the swelling of the inflammation until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the wound is bleeding, do not allow the inflammation to exit the wound in the mouth of the wound, so that you can tie a thread or instrument with which to treat the inflammation of the hydropaths, or form it as it is before.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And enlarge the wound, and cleanse it, and gather that the inflammation returns, and it will be assembled after six months or more, and when it is assembled, as before, and then the patient will pass his time with the malady.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the wounds
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	I advise that in the cutting of this branch, it is not done in more than one direction, for I think it is better to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say that every abscess comes either by cutting or by piercing, and I also agree.
et c’est par mout de cas.	And it is for the most part true.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by excessive acidity and ague, which is expanded as coins, or by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the corpse.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not have any pain, and the abscess is grievous.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are some grievous abscesses that are pale and purplish in color, and of no vein or artery ever comes out.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is by vein, if it is caused by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press on it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	1. And it is necessary that you only touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	1. This is made of vein grafts and is recognized by its arrangement at the expression of touching both, and can well make the shape as this appears, and as the others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	1. And it is that you cut the curd, then the cheese is at the top, and the whey is white and clear, and release the suspended parts from all parts of the cheese.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	1. If the cheese is already curdled with these grafts, then it is necessary that you stir the cheese and the curd.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If it is caught in the fist, or if it is in the vein that is closed, then you must deliver all of that blood, and the copa (cup) will overflow.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the child is from below, and you must pull it all out, and cut the cord, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If your labor is completed, then use the smooth linen thread in oil rose and wine, then continue with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the wounds
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	These are some bandages wrapped around an object resembling a bone, with the softening of the joints, and the patient suffers greatly as they move.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this disease is done well and promptly, just as we have seen in other cases, and all of you will know the outcome of it, according to what they used to do in the past.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you seat the patient on the high chair, then lift the suspender of the bones to your two hands, to all the flesh that is near the edge, and mark the masters, and extend them.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then use the large-trenched spatula to cut through the area of the veins, as they are discovered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then use a needle or have a double thread, and tie it to the first point where the wound came, and tie the other end to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them straight, according to the length of the corse, and cut off the decayed moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as we do with others, or if necessary, open the vein, so that no vein pierces the other.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For there is no harm in it, and all the veins come out, if you can manage to draw blood from all of them.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If he does not lose his strength due to the incision of the veins, and they become dry and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	The first sentence to translate is "de la routure dou syfac". The translation
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The evacuation of this tumor is by section or laceration, or extension along the abdomen in the part of the intestines that descend from that rupture to one of the veins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either due to laceration or extension, and these two methods of causing the problem are:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs of extension are when it is swelling and pain, if it happens suddenly and often in long periods, and does not suddenly cease.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscess grows until it reaches the foreskin, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The symptoms appear when it is the small intestine that comes out, which brings sudden pain, and various apparitions of scars, except for the skin covering it, and this is due to the end of the intestine and the stomach causing inflammation of the small intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never has the intestine been released with the circle, and it is held back, causing great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, it is necessary to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that if you command or massage the patient to move the intestine with their hand in the wound, if they can enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then, place your hand on their neck, and gently pull their chin.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then, place the knee at the belly button, and cut all the hair from the long side.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then, cut the tendons of the long muscles according to what you can handle to open the wound, and make them as long as possible.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then, scarify the skin that is dry and rough, as much as possible until it becomes white and hard.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then, cut your index finger along the edge of the bone that is exposed between the white skin that is dry and rough, and the second skin, and stop when it is behind the knee.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move the left hand to remove the knot, and hold the white thread at your right hand's tip, and gently pull it towards the tail.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And order the assistant to extend the thread at the top, and remove anything that is behind the limb.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And ask if your two have any intestines wrapped around or white thread hard, and if you find nothing, then open the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or if there is a thick thread made of 10 threads, and open it in the back part that is after the leather of the knots.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the cut, then cut the hairs that appear to be threads, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then assemble them one after another in a cross shape, and tie the string, which we mentioned is not of the skin of the bones, with a strong thread of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the threads of the threads, and tie them with two parts, so that no one of the scissors that are shaving can enter into you, as the gown does not fit.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And then tie the string according to the first long thread, and after these two threads leave the string that is not of the skin of the bones, as much as one.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then all the other according to the rounds that the hand carries.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then proceed with the part that is not well-shaved around the fingers, both those who do not shave and those who have a beard, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then smear the smooth wool with oil, and make incisions, and I smear the one that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is the white suet cauterized that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this is often repeated, and leave the line as it is for him.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in the healing, then raise the heat with hot water, and make incisions as we have said, until it is sore.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then, treat the wound with another treatment, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said it was made like the tendons that are assembled like the veins, in a similar way that you tie the arteries, after cutting them lightly at the end of the bone;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then, cover it with something, and treat the abscess that is causing it, as long as the arteries do not hurt;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No time comes rupture in angry wounds, as we have said, and open them;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and none of the intestines come out, and if they do, it's a matter of time, and repair them several times.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if he stays too long in this position, if it is believed that the wound or syphilis has occurred, until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of the scar which is in the groove, as we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes soft and narrows the lips and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure if it is by cauterization, as we have said before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and no time has ever been cured in this way.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And it happens that the patient groans when he feels the pain on his back between your hands, then pulls the limb from the fracture, which swells large according to the quantity of three does.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then remove the ointment that is dry on the skin, then take your hand and put it on the limb that seems to have a lot of sweat.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	Then press your hand on the abdomen, then count the two limbs that seem to have a lot of sweat on the hand, and count both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the hand from the abdomen, and do not pull or extend the urethra or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the wounds of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then the treatment by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if the wound is cleaned and healed, as soon as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scar is concealed, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is harsh in this place, and further away from the wound.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the thighs.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the hair of the brows is cut in any man, because the horns that are born are softened, and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one sees the patient being treated, to shave the back of the head, and the barber cuts off the softened hair that is on the natural hair.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, first the excess of the softened hair is at three stitches or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the stitches, and the barber as with other wounds, as long as it is healthy, and cuts the thread.
dou chastrement	1. "dou chastrement" translates
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	1. Sicknesses that are caused by cold are mentioned in our law, and this is why I preferred not to discuss them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	2. It is necessary for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	3. One reason is that the patient's response to the question and treatment can be determined through observation;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	4. The other reason is that we often perform castration of certain animals for our help, such as sheep and lambs, and goats, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	5. Therefore, I say that sicknesses are treated in these two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	6. Either by attraction or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we make by attraction, let our seat be the best in hot water, as long as the coin is softened and during.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then put your finger in it, as long as they are back and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of size reduction:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you tighten the best seat, and press the curved part of the coin with your left hand, then pull the suspender, and cut each knot at the end of the coin when you have well burned them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no small sore or subtle sore that is on the veins.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	This method of restraint is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because attraction does not tire from any adventure, as the beast desires pleasure.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then treat the wound while it is still healthy.
des hermofrodites	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de feu
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermann's method can be divided into two categories for humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is when the two openings are separated and look like the nature of a woman, or it has hair, and never once does it pass urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	and the other way is in women, and it has to touch the hairs as a girl and the openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the stomach and intestines is when you cut all the knots and treat them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, men whose urine leaps from the skin of their thighs, if there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	The first sentence to translate is "de la tentigene
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentaginous is a char that is placed on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and no women have had such as this, and it is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you wash the superfluity of the tentaginous with your hand or nails, and lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not make it too strong, for the blood that comes is not life, and then the other cure until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another form that is not in the mouth of the patient, and the emplace, and by chance it jumps further, and it resembles the appearance of a cough, and for this it was called the ancient "cough disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to cut, as we have said for temptation, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if it is that the nature of the woman is not well known, or the cough is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And it is by nature or accident due to a disease that has come, whether from birth or later.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it is by chance or due to a subtle or secret facial injury, and it is made in the mouth or on the chest, or in the neck, or wherever.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And then comes the design, and the pregnancy, and by chance the flow has;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of whether it is by the turn of the wheel;
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the dislocation is noticed immediately, whether it is your fault or theirs.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is subtle pain and it is approaching the ears, then go quickly and they will return.
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	You must assemble two indices, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then, the two ears are formed as long as the subtle pain does not return and is not overcome by dizziness.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then, take the linen, and the oil, and put it on the shoulder, and make the woman sit each hour to prevent it from sticking.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is severe and persistent, it may be necessary to use a mustard plaster resembling a flax seed.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If dizziness is of short duration, then let's go to the gallbladder and the spleen.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the medicines that cleanse blood, as well as blood of dragon, incense, and an abundance of urine.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then make a wide cut, if the wound cannot be stitched up;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and it should be long, and a tent of dry linen is made;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat other wounds as needed until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	2. And when the marriage comes, if it is necessary to cut, according to this method, do not enchant with apostles.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	3. For the enchantment in the marriage that is in the patient, it should not be touched by force.
des emorroides	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Morning sickness is the first signs of pregnancy that are not usual, and when morning sickness becomes very strong, it becomes the lullaby.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have said in the division the appearances of the parts, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive care.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the morbid and the swelling, when they are present in the marriage, and it is not apparent by feeling, if not by the care of iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are in the mouth of the marriage, can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then open the tail with nails, and cut off the roots, then powder the medicines restricting blood, as for ice and blood of the dragon and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then boil her feet at the door for an hour, then put them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if the blood comes out, then put it in a decoction of sumac and ash of green apples and pomegranate seeds and similar things, and then take flour of oats, and make with honey and sugar, and apply it to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it dislocates, it is bad.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, I make him blow air on the back and see if it causes pain.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take a leaf, and the juice of plucked plantain or of rue with vinegar, and blow on the wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is healed, if you can cleanse the wound as soon as it is healthy.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the spicy herb called "thelul"; if it works, then cover it as I have said.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then cleanse it as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of the abscesses of the patient
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of abscesses that come in the patient, such as chancre and puerperal abscess, herpes, gangrene, fistules, and empyemas, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	The correct translation of the sentence is: "Therefore, it is necessary to address this issue in this treatment, which is not an aposteme but a bow.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	The correct translation of the sentence is: "And if you see that the fire is red, then look to see if the aposteme has started at its beginning, and with chill and fever, and if it becomes red, you will see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	The correct translation of the sentence is: "However, do not forcefully remove it, but make sure that the pain is calmed.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	The correct translation of the sentence is: "Then I will place the patient on the bed, and have two pillows under their head, and one under their buttocks, and support their back and assemble their legs as if they were lying down.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let his belt be expanded, and put on his shoes and laces, and tie them well with a bow.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then the bile flows towards the left side of the chest, and the instrument used to open the mouth of the marriage is applied, and afterwards comes the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being applied, you fix the rait first to know the beauty of the bride, so that what comes out of the instrument does not exceed what it should, and does not hurt the midwife.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the rait is larger than necessary, it is necessary to cover the beauty of the bride with cloths, so that what comes out of the instrument does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary that he puts the instrument's horn at the hole, and he draws the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess is open, and it is made with the hand large, if it comes to the head, to the spumous matter.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is visible, if it comes that you put in the wound soft tentacles in olive oil, or in green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And put the tent of the wound at the corner of the marriage, and put under it the marriage and under the clean soft in vinegar or water that are cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the care after two days of ointment coming to this, as long as it is healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never lift the wound and the cut with a feather and honey, and then with honey or roots of liquorice and aromatic plants that are long;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	and then apply the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is dressed in the marsh, then it comes that you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Experience is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman pressing against the wall, and desires to smell the aromatic herb.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	and then help the children of the fire.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	you understand that these children are according to the natural figure, and they are from the head of the woman, and the second one with her.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	When you see these signs, it comes to pressing lightly on his belly if the child is cold.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when he descends from his head, if it is followed by him, and the marriage of his superfluities with good cleanliness.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes on its own feet, and comes to the heart or head, or hands, or when it comes to the belly or side, and is converted by chance of his collar, and by other harmful figures.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is skilled in the dance that it is wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures so that you can help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	When the child comes to his head naturally, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and her virtues are weak, if it is laid on a pillow or the women hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and its nature is olive oil or fenugreek, and then cook the ointment between its two small spheres, which is its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and divide the second part, and cut it to the length of the joint that has been corrected;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and make the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to wrap the woman with muslin of fenugreek with olive oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	1. Then I will apply and apply the ointment, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	2. If it is now necessary to remove it.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	3. And if the hands come out faster and faster, then you must gently pull them apart a little at a time.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	4. And if they do not enter, then the woman should sit down on the chair, and gently lift her feet to the top.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	5. Then lean the chair against the wall, and tie the woman's hair so that she does not fall while standing.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	6. And if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then she should hold her hands at the corner that is in front of her, and pull out the child, and gently pull it apart.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the issue of the child with its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the children come to their toes, if they want to put it on high.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then the turn is made little by little, as it is equal.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then she presses her toes and extends it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump as high as curved, if ordered to stretch, and I make it extend by condyle.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps, may God see.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if the nail is turned a little by little until it is in accordance with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he does not jump as we have, say that I use muslin cloth, and ointment of sinews, and melted gum, and all in the mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and make of the woman's breast the poultice, then place it on the wound until it is dry up to the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is soggy enough, take a piece of barley, and place it on top, and leave it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then place it on the fire, then stretch and pull the mouth and nose, and press the stomach lightly, as the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child from its groin
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if you hold its hands very little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then wrap it around its neck, and let it hang down, and then gently rock it.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And she folds her hands together a little, and then she puts her hands on her belly, and she presses the knuckles of the fingers, until it is flat enough.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, then take your hands and make them form a fist, then push the belly forward, then pull your hands back.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	And the child is small and small.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And command the woman to push as much as the child will allow.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes with a wide open hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to bring the hand back.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If we cannot bring it back, then lift the woman up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If it cannot move, if I order it to stand on its feet, and the legs form;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then I will paralyze the muscles that I have mentioned.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not cry out, if I make it sit on my throne, then it will study the handcoming of the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and the child follows the natural figure, and I make it smaller, and I command it to pray as much as the child can.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's neck, and spread its hands, and turned its face towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the dance marks its hand, then it turns a little and a little, and it becomes light.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	When it is even, if I put on the muscles of the elderly and the oily, as we have said, then I command it to move a little and a little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	When you have done this, if it is placed on the inside of the shoulder, and it is commanded to be wet,
et la fai esternuer.	then it will be stretched.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. In the same manner for all subsequent times.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When this happens to the entire second part of the shoulder, if the second part of the finger is not dry,
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it can be held on its face and neck, if the cold does not hold, and the finger dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then bind the child's hand, as long as you have put it in this way, and command the woman to never be wet.
adonques si istra legierement.	However, if it is done lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	The children of twins are born many times, but never three or four times.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	This is a strange thing, and not often seen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are strange, and do not live long, and are rarely known.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they may be multiplied, and are destroyed by the lust that decorates them, which is subject to the body.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And never are they naturally like all others under, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come truly, then the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and it is made quickly and lightly what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And make it as it ought to be for greeting.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Never are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the old glorious wife, and cover that the dance is all there, because by chance something like this comes;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if it is made according to this that it ought to be;
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the dead or dying child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to open with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary that you cut off the woman's head if she is of sound virtue and has no accident or dies.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary that the woman be bent over her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife applies the burn of II part, or she is laying down if she is not treated at the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then anoint the mouth of the midwife with moistened oils of olive, musk, and fenugreek, and the linseed, then wipe her hands with these oils and muscillages.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then the bones are lightly cut, then the head or the shoulders that can be bent at this point, and one takes care that the children are not exposed to falling down from the head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the bones are found in the neck or collarbone or mouth or ears or beard or chin or cheekbones, and if the member is cut off, then it is cauterized or burned and the wounds are cleaned;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to burn the bone in the left hand, and places the cork between the two fingers of the right hand, and cuts the bone with all the left hand, and does not miss any of these joints that we have mentioned, as long as it reaches the empty state;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And it is the form of the onyx:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then look for another onyx, or if you are skilled in this, if the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then the extractions are equal by moving from one side to the other, by pulling, and if the onyx teeth are held by pulling, as in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part is loosened, if one of its two oils does not remain, and the other is taken out in that part, and the other part is handled.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it is not loosened at all, then place this onyx or higher on the limb, and do this until it is completely free.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to the strain, then you must wrap it around as tightly as possible, until it is entirely wrapped.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then the bandage is tied around the ankle joint or wrist, and it is then necessary to tie it with the other hand and pull on the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is difficult to deliver, or there is a sudden increase in pain, then you must cut the sharp spatula between your two hands, and then remove the spatula and take out the pus.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you cut it with the instrument called "almidach", or if the formation comes with the menstrual blood or after the chapter.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in this same way, children are naturally born.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull on the bones with nails, and if it does not fall away, it is held in place by force, as long as the moisture that caused it is or was present;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be removed, then cut it apart at the place where you put it;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is twisted in the belly or loosened from the ribs, then you must cut through it as long as the moisture is present;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is near its bones, if it is gently attracted, and the stitches are placed in the mouth of the mother it is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted in the belly or at the anus, then you must pull it out gently with your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and they make the belly or the buttocks, as long as the moisture remains on it.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other bone is affected and the shoulder is dislocated, then he should hold his hand in front of him and pull it back towards the breast, and he will be able to pull it out of the mouth of the breast.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then he should pull out I one bone or II another, and he will be able to pull it out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the breast is retracted due to inflammation that has come, then there will be no need for manipulation, but it is necessary to administer moist and heavy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the administration is applied, and it is cooled and moistened in an ointment.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	If the child is lying on its side, and you place it straight, then follow what we have said in the live child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if there is no pain, if it is broken in pieces, and nothing of the second part remains.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, follow what we have said about the abscess that comes in the marriage.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if the evacuation of blood comes, if it is put in ice to restrict, and other cures are followed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman in whose belly some children were dead, then consulted me with another and said death to the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time, there came some abscesses in the body, and they swelled as soon as they were seen, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought it would be long, and I could not relieve the pain.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong pressure with a hard attraction, and after some time, more and more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised, because the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wish for the wound, and in treating hands with ice, as long as the woman was not better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman long tensely, and it was a little below the knee.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I did not remember this chapter for only because, when the master made an unusual thing, he thought to ask for help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocation back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Then comes the form of the compress, with which we wrap the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and then it turns around as the heads of the two legs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Indeed, the horns are more slender and narrow, and should be made of flat or round.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth should be of the size of a thumb, and the margin of the trees should be of a length of a palm and a half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and among the two limbs are two dislocations of this same joint, which are closed on one side and open on the other, half a palm in length or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two dislocations are bitten in the mouth of the patient to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, which is more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of flat or beaded material, depending on the appearance of the tines.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has the two dislocations, as you see, half a palm in length, and it must be wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	When you see the female open the marriage all the instruments, if the woman is I lit, the thighs and the legs are spread, then pull the two dislocations together in the marriage, and hold the end of the instrument's handle between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then move your hand along the entire instrument, if you have inserted it correctly, according to the quantity you see opened in the marriage's mouth, as long as the ball fits as she sees.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is all around, and its appearances are multiplied.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	When you see it appeared, the more he moves, the higher it goes for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	2. If you do not despise the instrument that you have not yet seen, because its necessity is not your own.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second pillar is held in childbirth, if it comes that you command the midwife to hold her hair, and then stretch it with tweezers, and then force your hands to her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps for this, it's well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then I can, and make a puncture or incision, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the mother, such as mint, cloves, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or boiled in hot water.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a cork or a plug in the end of it, and the other end in the mare's mouth, and tighten it as much as the vapor comes out of the mare.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then I make it tighter, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second dose is not given.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not better, then command the patient to massage their left hand with oil of sesamum or musk, and then blow in the nose, and they want the second one.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds it, if she grabs and stretches it a little at a time, so that the mare does not resist the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But the purpose is to move lightly to the right and left, and then trace.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and dries out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is closed, we have said the cure to dilate and fumigate with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it does not contain all that we have said, then keep from touching the tracing.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But what is inside the mouth of the wound, you should tie it to the woman's nail, then apply ointment with four-drug mixture.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If it is washed and reset, and it comes out further.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But all that, if it comes out with a bad smell in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If then there are necessary purifying smoke:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	no one of the ancients has tried purifying smoke of basil and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is that which is used to burn the woman with the retention of flowers and the second seed if this is:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it seems like a dog, and it puts the large head under the nature, and the wide heads under the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and the smoke over the charcoal, and the sweat as much as it is possible, and another one begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to break the foundation of
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it has been smoked some subtle powder.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it comes down to the dance where they pierce that man's ear, and do not pierce it with a sharp nail, and make sure the prick does not touch;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place the wound with fine cloth in wine and oil, then apply the ointment as soon as it is clean.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not heal, if you put on a poultice of plaster, and leave the hands free, and see what happens when the children go to bed in their rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes a swelling from wounding or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it comes down to the swelling:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If you treat it, as we have said about the snake's venom.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula formed by moisture
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow when they come out of the root, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	When the node is old, if it is worked on, and moisture is applied with warmth or subtle force, and they are never seen to be persistent fistulas.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	They are known by the fact that they are caused by either ejection or ventrism when the patient evacuates, and by chance, some jump.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if fistulas are present in the uterus and half of the vagina.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach the joint of the clitoris and the root of the penis.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And it is known that the persistent fistula is at its base, and not persistent.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	When you cut your finger, if it bleeds a lot, and you insert a small needle made of iron or steel into the wound when it is not twisted.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is twisted, and you insert a small needle or horsehair thread, as soon as you feel the needle or hair thread in your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no sign of bleeding, pain, or swelling, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	If it does not pierce easily.
si te haste dou curer.	If you feel pain to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the bladder or leads to urine, and if the urine suddenly comes out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	And if it pierces easily at the joint of the finger, if the needle or hair thread goes into the finger.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If he does not have cunning and the invention of pain, then it is that he will be in great pain and needs immediate medical attention.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these Persian-like fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of proud people who enter them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not Persian and not ancient, with hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient groans between your hands on his back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he gently lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then make a tent of rain, or of planks if it is twisted, as long as you can or the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it through the bone, then you must cut your finger, and it is clear that the tent has been set.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And it is discovered or you feel between your thumb the joint or the knee, therefore check that it is straight.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it cannot be made straight with a little effort.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that one can make any joint straight, but this takes time.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And it helps if you wash the cauterization with the fistula according to its size, as it is said in front.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the butt is all hot as it is made in the fistula, as long as it remains in the foundation.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and cut this twice or three times, as long as you think that these marks must be made, which resemble a feather of ostrich.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of the wounds is softened with bread, as long as that mark remains, then the treatment of the ointment is applied and dried.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in good health, so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If so, no other name can be healthy.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is tried between, and does not pierce the one that is at the foundation, and between your thumb and finger an espece of cloth or soap is placed, and you see the fistula at which the cloth is shown;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the glove covers the beginning of the fissure, and it comes out before the tent, and then the cauterization is performed afterwards, as long as it reaches the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be delivered to the tent, and will hurt.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then, deflect those charms that seem like a feather of a sparrow, and none remain unbroken.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire or medicinal heat.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery, there are two main things assembled:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the surety of these charms that are displaced, and the closure of blood and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of tented wounds can be made by boiling or smoking, as long as it is not boiled and the charms are placed in the fire.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then, treat the wound of the burnt suet with hot, dry medicine.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return often.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes suddenly with great force, and it is removed from the body, if the flesh is torn or broken, and investigate this matter.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and it is made of cloth or silk, or if it is near to tearing, if it has not been injured by a sharp object, then by the application of one of the three methods below:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you burn it as we have said, or you cover it with a poultice and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not burn too much at once, but cover the foundation with a poultice and let the exudations pass through the desired opening.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then the treatment, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance, if it is healthy, you remove the covering and the skin, then it is covered with something from the foundation, or by force or with another instrument appointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then you deformed the wound that was in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then you study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part that is deformed from the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If there is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never are fistulas in this way:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you pull the string in the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation from the skin, if you take a string according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you cut it in two, and pull the tent through all the fistula as much as it is at the head:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is present at the margin of the foundation, then pull out the thread of that which has been pricked, as you reach the end of the foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and cut off the end of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and pull them apart, and leave one or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not fasten it once, until the threads that are between them have been tightened as much as possible, and knotted.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound as soon as it is sore and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all possible ways that you can, it will not fit.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make the stitch too tight if it fits, and then the cure, as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny thorn which was used to make the fistula if it is hard and of a single tooth, part and tears it apart.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, because it is not possible to cop (or handle) this because of what you see here:
des emorroydes	of morbid growths.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Errorms are according to two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	They are either denser than the foundation, like resin grains, and they become smaller and larger, and when cut, they cause pain and injury, and they damage the foundation and its root;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	However, those that are denser have little moisture, and when cut, they have a little bit of golden-colored or bluish-green, and they have the color of corns;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those that are denser is that you command the patient to let it run freely in chambers as much as the foundations will allow, and they will see the hairs;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you have sharp nails, or if you hold it by its root, then pull it out in its entirety.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	If the uncinate bone cannot be held by its roots, then bend it at the neck, or at the shoulder, or from a piece of cambric.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Then pull it out through your two hands, and clean it with some warm powders that are in the fire cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or if you cauterize as instructed in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if they become united, then cauterize the patient with clister, which is bitter and sharp, and wash the part where they are united, so that it may open.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	The patient must follow the instructions, and if the wound is shallow, a light cure is sufficient.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And if you prick your finger or nails with the needles, clean them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy and do not fear the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it happens that you loosen the stitching according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take the thread tightly, and pull it through the eye, then lay the thread down at the other end, make sure the other end is sharp, turn the two ends of the thread over the sharp end, and if it is large;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And he tightens the thread, then knots it, and pulls out the needle, and does the same for all the others, and leaves him to correct any excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then he puts the foundation lax and smooth in oil or wax, and puts it on the foundation, and commands the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then he leaves it until the wounds are fully healed, and when they are, if there is any other treatment or care needed, until the patient is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	It seems like there might be a mistake in the provided text. The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fon
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there has been scarring in the intestines, and by constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine is powerless.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you must return to the point of a spatula or your nail, which does not allow it to dry.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then the doctor, as he can, according to what is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if he cannot reduce it, then the dislocation returns more forcefully than before, until it is painful and burned.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor, as he can.
dou fremit	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Insect bite is a small swelling that should appear near the heart and causes pain.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never the fever leaves it, and it feels like death, and comes throughout the body, and more hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the doctor if you take a fox's tail or a vulture's feather, and place it on the fever, as long as the purple circle encircles the fever completely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around all the chain as you coil it from end to end, and insert it in its place, and adjust the movement of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you see, if I make this of a copper or iron needle according to this form, and it is very fine and thin:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not forget to measure, but hold tightly, and press firmly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if the cautery burns the joint, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a circle:
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never once have I seen a silver or gold clasp, or an alloy or hinged one.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never once have I seen these small and large chews, according to which they are stolen.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	But these are made in the treatment of children and weak and painful ones, they are small:
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the little and big fire cautery is such that it is inserted wide, or the belly is made in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if there is a distention or the belly is tight, as you see, and the child is not perceived;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and in one of the costes of the second pustule, and in the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and if it is the belly or if they put medicines from a vessel of beef or of paraffin, and perceive all around every pustule, and each pustule should have a spice, then pour in these pustules I fil strong I thread crooked X or entor, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is given, if the line has the instrument in front of a strong thread, then clasp.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And if the medicine is not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or tallow of beef or something similar, then pour it in lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the surgeon uses his two hands to assemble the instruments, as much as possible, then removes the clasp, and gently supports the patient's legs on the table, and if necessary, applies the medicine as it comes out, until the wound is as large as it can be.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps all night, it will be even better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you have a dislocation of the abdomen due to disease, and the medicine comes out, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the patient has an abscess or gangrene, if the clasp is also very small, as with a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And it is the form of the subtle clasp that is drawn on, if the skin is also very tight.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the division of the cure of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	The translation of "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils sont lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent." is:
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the place or the wound is made, and how it is made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that are made are by piercing, and the size of the eye and the tooth, or the lance, the dart, or the spear, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	according to the bones of the shoulder, like a wound at the neck, or on the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the chest, as the remembrance comes to this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes on the chest, and the bone is not broken, if it is by piercing or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt of gangrene:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If the head wound is not healing, and blood comes from the wound, and it is worse on one side than the other.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and the patient suffers from excessive alcohol consumption and large amounts of meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not heal, and the patient's meat becomes lean, and they do not drink alcohol, and do not eat charred meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply the wound with a poultice of herbs and oil, or wine, if it comes out easily.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if the poultice does not stick to the wound, and it is fresh at all its edges, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will mention later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is moved, if it is placed on any wounds, as long as it is clean.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	When the wound is large, like that of a spear and similar things, and the lips cannot be assembled by tenting, if they can be assembled by stitching, if I may say so, like belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is discovered to be on bone, and can be held, but only with one hand, then it is called a "cope.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then the wound is treated with medicine and restored with leather, and orders the patient to eat large meats, such as tests, flour, and chicken, as well as similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you drink or eat raw meat, and it does not touch the bone, then the wound is called a "cope" for the entire time it lasts, and it heals.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	If an artery has entered the wound or vein, which cannot be cut without causing damage, and it cannot be relieved by medicine, if the artery needs to be cut, and you can dislodge it by tying a string.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, if the cautery is applied.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is treated lightly.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if you put this powder on the wound, which does not seem to have caused any pain.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	The way the powder is applied is.
pren encens une partie;	Take some candlewax on a part.
sanc de dragon II parties;	The first sentence to translate is "sanc de dragon II parties". The translation of this phrase is "dragon's tooth, two parts".
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	The second sentence to translate is "chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment". The translation of this phrase is "the live chalz has three parts, and the subtle powder, and use the wound, and they form together, as it heals well and joins with all its sanc".
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	The third sentence to translate is "et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle". The translation of this phrase is "and then it heals well, and let it feel slippery, if it does not".
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The fourth sentence to translate is "car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee". The translation of this phrase is "because we do not stop the medicine until it is cured".
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no time is it made, but when there is no incense or sanctuary from the dragon, but only the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if he thinks the wound is not healing, immediately in this manner, do not use any other powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but use some digestive ointments, or wheat flour dough made of vinegar and honey, as soon as it starts to seep.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then use fine tweezers to remove it.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you later about the more serious fractures.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the shoulder
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	A wound comes from the shoulder
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a dislocation, then if there is no other option but to leave the treatment alone and do not use anything restricting, because it helps to reduce and pull back the bones.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of such is with the brain, which is the heavier member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but if the medicine is warm, such as when chalz is washed in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and the wound is also washed in gentle water, and other pierces according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, and it is covered with bandages, then the treatment will continue as soon as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and full of hair and bowels, then the arrow or lower down the limb.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut, and the blood flows, then the patient should be desouvied, and the limb removed, and the cauterization is done as best as possible.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If the spine of the neck is broken at the base, either the jaw or the tongue, and the conduits are kept, by which the meat comes out, if the bone is below the chin of the neck, and does not touch the head but is returned to its natural figure;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the patient is strapped and some hair is left, then the care of discharges is discarded as soon as it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has impressed the bone, if he wants.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, if the cut is as deep as possible, and those that are not possible, leave it as much as the wound presses, and be careful and alleviate the result;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wound is fresh, then powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has in the wound bone and it has an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a lance or arrowhead wound, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound to see if the bone is protruding:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	And that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh at all its point, then do not put anything in the first hour, but powder only on the sore, and let it be soaked with the sore until it becomes soft, and open it up at the chest, and see the face of the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but it gives an attractive pull, and he pulls it twice the day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no pull, then put cotton in the wound for suction to dry the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four or more days.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, and no trembling of the body, and no straining of the limbs.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good position, be glad that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat the dislocation with splints and other treatments as soon as possible while the patient is still healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	If it cannot be healed, and is made worse by her efforts, she should seek medical attention.
si la cure si com on doit.	If the cure is done correctly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision or a cut with a scalpel, and it is simple, or on the back, if the care provided by the one in front of you is sufficient.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If the wound is large, of great concern.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If the wound is small, of little concern, and it is in the bone, and has been infected with pieces, if the patient wants to know about the wound, and they should be treated if they are dry.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	If they are not dry, if the wound is left open, if it is extracted, if it is aligned.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	When there are other wounds on other parts of the body, and they are judged to be similar to what we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre." The translation of
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The opening of the stomach is large and difficult and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	but no time the intestine, or the intestines, by which the insertion of others.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the wound is more painful, and no time the small wound that the large one, because we have to put more pins in the intestines, if we do not put them back in a row.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell so much that they feel pain, if they are put in more pins, and because it is harder to manage the other wound, because we have to pull the intestine back to its place.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	1. And you should know that the dislocation of the ribcage occurs in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	2. The most common costurings come from the costuring of the ribcage, and the costurings of other body parts are common in other injuries.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	3. And all of them are more proper with the costuring of the ribcage, and I will say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	4. I say that when the wound is small, and there is no harm to the intestines, and it is difficult to set, this is one of the four ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	5. Either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are compressed by the force.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	When it is inflamed, wash it with a certain way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Dampen a sponge or a soft cloth only, or use hot water and salt and vinegar and rinse the intestines as long as they are not sore.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never make this wine tightening, and it is dried that it can be opened.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	When you see the intestines coming out, if the hot or cold water has not been cooked, because of this it is difficult for the entrance to be closed.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then make a small wound in the incision with the instrument and cut the blood clots.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	The first cure is to cut off the size that has no need to be cut unless there is great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	This is the first cure by cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If he cuts through the tendon in the shoulder and does not, then see the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if it is put back in according to its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest:
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it is in the lower part of the belly, then he should lie down with his head and chest higher than the parts below, and thus he will not rupture the abdomen by putting more weight on one side than the other:
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And then it comes to administer what I say in great and dirty wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	Small wounds, use what seems appropriate, then take between your hands the pitying ointment that stains all the rupture on your hand, and gather your lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common way of sutures, and that you use a needle or more, according to the size of the wound, then leave the end of the wound free, and sew it with a needle or one that has a strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And perforate the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the sifac, which is the opposite of the leather's grain, as long as you can perforate it from that side, and gather the two ends of the sifac in groups of four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the strain of a double thread through the needle of II parts, then assemble the II heads of the wound, and then leave ID spicules, and then insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then the thread of the needle is as you have done the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you are used to with needles, until all the wound is restricted.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And the needles should be sharp and thin, for thin needles close all the skin, and very thick ones do not enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For it is necessary that they be sharp.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to pinch the eyes too hard on the nose and cheek, which do not close and wound the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then pinch the heads of the eyelids, which do not swell the patient at night, and put cloths or blankets on the eyelids to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	This method of stitching eyelids is more comfortable for small wounds, as it does not cause pain to one or the other.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitching is common, and it is that you gather the two eyelids of leather and the two eyelids of silk together with one thread or it has a strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	When you have perceived these four parts assembled, first reset the needle at the part where you began. In the same manner as the threads.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a splice between each stitch of the large part of a thread.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch saves the man's life, and I saw a wound that some had in their bellies, which was caused by a cut, and it was a wound more than a palm of great size, and it was intestines well over two palms of great size, and it was the wound in his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned to the intestine after it had been twenty-four hours, and it was then fifteen years old, and the patient was treated, and they became healthy again.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And he saw that he would die, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not cure it with ointments, because I am in the shoulder or nowhere to be found, and no remedies are available.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply cotton wool soaked in warm vinegar twice a day on the wound, and rinse with honey-sweetened water as it heals.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or, if you ask for the two most common methods of cooking:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and remove the sharp part from the end of the thread.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the right through the right, if you have lost the tip or needle, or if you have removed the needle, and then perforate another part of the sharp part, until it is smooth.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And they understand this technique if you follow as the barber does the beard, and once you let go of one end, and then take it back again, until the hair is fully styled.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of braiding, which Galiens himself calls, is if anyone can do it, which assembles the two parts naturally, and applies one end of the hair to the other end, in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Thread a needle or hair hook near the end, and carefully measure it, and leave the other two ends of the hair.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and measure it from the opposite end, using the other two ends of the hair.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then I measure the distance between the two parts of the limb, in two other points that are on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most common way of stitching and the best.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this, and no one testifies to it, so we must sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And it must be sewn with one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the same way as those that are being stitched.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And he says that when the wound is in the belly, if the stitching is more painful than other stitches in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	And it is that when you touch the fresh wound with all its blood, if it has not moved, then reposition the intestine, and it will heal.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then put the dust powdered char on it, and if it has not moved, then put any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bowed.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And cut the string, and they will be less painful, and it will heal.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as you would with others, until it is healthy.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have medicine, then put it on, as much as it comes out of the belly, cotton wool, and rub it twice a day until it is healthy again.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other skill in other positions than the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not cause permanent damage to the principal limbs, then it is best to moisten lightly with oil of chalcyreus or rose oil, and put on the ankles, and remove the sutures.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if it feels pain or fluid in the bowels, and often comes out, then the dressings should be changed to wine from Germany, and at the same time the fluid comes up to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And the perc mark, and scars that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The small intestine, which is called "young," cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the knots that tie it, and the subtlety of all the body's parts, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the gut leaps from the wound, if it is reset as the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it becomes dark and turns towards the black, then you must lie the black one that has veins and arteries, because it has veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut what is between the lines, and move the two heads downwards from the edge of the wound until the extraction is loosened when the gut jumps, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the bursting of the womb
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in a few days, because I have seen that some people were saved or had their bellies shot by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the left side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and contained the excretion and vomiting;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated him according to my ability and continued to sublimate until he was healthy, and I saw the results.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him recover, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no harm, but he improved with better conditions, and drank and ate.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And say no experiencers that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be treated in a certain way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	He should stretch his jaws widely, then bring the corners of the wound together, and when he has stretched his mouth as far as it will go, if he puts his lips on either side of the wound, so that it pulls his mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then he grips the wound and holds it tightly, if he can't slip, then he stretches his jaws in the same way as before, until the wound is completely surrounded by his teeth;
et cout la plaie.	And hold the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	The first line of the text translates to: "If they burn in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thread very fine that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in a certain way:".
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	The second line of the text translates to: "Take the head of this intestinal thread that is full of feces, and then tie it to the head of this linen thread I, and thread the thread through the needle, and then cut the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;".
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	The third line of the text translates to: "And this way of stitching is not worse than according to the course of engagement and hope;".
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	When the wound is large and wide, and it is in one of the small intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, it should be treated with great care.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula", and at the same time if they are thin and straight.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is formed according to the nodulation that must be hard and bluish, where one feels pain, and it is as fine as the tail of an ox.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And never in a clear jump, and sometimes it is thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	And never sharp, and sometimes it is quite.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have seen it in the division of wounds, that all wounds that are not healed, and there is no cause, it is only due to one of the eight causes.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It is to know, by the small pain of blood or corse;
ou por sa malice;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	If the medicine is not effective in the cure.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	For because corruption is a kind of pestilence.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	For by the property in the region, digestion is delayed, and health is delayed, and it flees by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or he has veins or bones.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The following sentence to translate: "Or covenant that I make you know the cure of fistula which is made by hand's work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Surge that fistula comes in all members of the corps.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For he has fistulas that come from great veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the costals, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	If a part of the member comes to its own, and it is like this.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind are of good healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no fistula that does not come to the part I said, and you are married to the cure, and you see it done, then take a needle or iron, if the fistula is straight, if you want.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, then search with a fine needle, because the needles do not go through the twists.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula of hands is purulent and you do not press it well with your hand, if it is infected by one of the wounds, for the moisture is short in one wound and cleanses the other.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then, if you are wise, you will know whether it is bone or flesh, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when their hand is pressed, and where they feel the pain.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know the bone or flesh, and whether it is far from the joint, or the nerve, or the artery or vein, or any of the joints I have mentioned, if the copper according to what I have said, and the falsehood and the corrupt bones that are dense.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	Then the cure, as long as she is healthy, and if the fistula is well lined with the right place, then it should be covered as soon as possible, as soon as you can, then put fine cloths in the medicated water, and the bougies are inserted into the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is left in the font.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put clean bandages on the healthy part, as long as it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	if it is not healthy by this, then the cauterization is done as we have said, and if the part is corrupted by the fistula, then it should be cut off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the joint does not cause pain or the principal limbs do not suffer, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is discovered, and it becomes corrupted and black, until the corruption is completely removed, then the treatment of things that are strange and unusual will be done as soon as it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healthy, and the belly becomes thin, as before, you should know that you are not fit to do this.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If the dislocation is discovered and you want it as much as you can be at the joint, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, you should know that corruption is too advanced, and it will not improve.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other means than natural remedies.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can remove it with needles, if possible, and if there are more, do not leave any;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture is against you, and there is no pain or fear, then cope with it and endure the heat, and deliver the bones;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you do not cut the bones in an hour, if you put something slippery on the wound, and leave it as long as it is moist between the bones, and then they will become lighter between the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is large bones, such as thigh or knee, if only the corrosion remains until blackness covers the entire area, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if it has large parts of corroded bone, and comes near the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to sew and cover all the corrosion, and then treat as much as possible;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about an abscess that came to one's leg, if you take it as an example and help in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	It was the young man who had been in his thirties, who had a pain in his leg for a cause that came from the chest, so much that the materials came to the leg, and he was hidden by a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the patient was so mad that they overwrote everything, and it corrupted the materials, and became a fistula, and then pus came out of the wounds and the cold made the body shiver and the moisture increased.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And for two years, they were cured, and no one had any knowledge of the art of hands, as I was called, and I saw their leg and the medicines used to cure them, and what was corrupted by the pus at great cost.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the patient's cheeks became red, and had a citron color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at the other part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I was surprised, and I found in one of the wounds a part of the bone, and I discovered it was corrupted and decayed, and the corruption reached the dens of the bones.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was the one who appeared from the corrupted bone, and I took care that it had no other corruption, as long as I stayed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with long stitches of sodanic medicines, and could not stitch.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I took it out again, and revealed the bone as far as possible, and found continued corruption in the bone, and treated it, and then put it back in, and made a decision to stitch the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not do it until I cut off a piece of the bone, and it was all its size, then I restored it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was cured and relieved quickly, and he did not want to repeat the operation because of the inability of the surgeon, who could not endure it, and for fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For as the evacuation of blood is often, but it was completely healthy, and a hard char was found on the bone, and it was well positioned and had no harm or opposite effect in any way, nor in the air nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in no joint of the arm, then it should be set in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take the levers, and draw the head of the bone up to the open end, and command that it does not extend further up.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And take another lever of greater size than the first one, and lie it on the cheek that is on the bone, and pull the head, if you can draw the broken part of the bone away from the cheek, and release the cheek, so that the lever does not break the cheek.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place the incision at a distance of one finger's breadth from the bone to cover the corrupted part.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And soak as much as possible and see and feel the corruption, and soak again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the surrounding tissue or a part of it, then cut through the entire bone.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then make another incision, and then soak the affected part with water from one end to the other, and let the water be as long as the corruption is deep. As we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and see if the bone or it contains another part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption spreads to the continuation of the second joints, if there is no other cause than cold copper.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if corruption is or a prick of the hand, or a prick of the foot, if it is very hard that thing, but it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, knowing how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And you purify it in all ways that you can, but the vein or the nerve will not oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And you question the incision and the bones that these bones are many, according to the seat of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and their fineness, and their growth and their smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and because it happens in each appearance of the work's instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and you should know that the work will show the instrument you will use, according to the knowledge of this art, and it testifies to the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if the instrument you will use does not match according to what is needed.
dou feu	The first line of the text is
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder presses due to weakness or by reason of drought.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated the corrosion with medicine, and it does not improve, then it may be necessary to cut into the member up to the place where the corrosion comes, if the malady is greater than that of the death or the malice, which is more serious, of the fault of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	When the signs appear that the limb becomes black, if it seems that it is from burning heat, and then after the discoloration, this corrosion spreads to all the limbs, and takes hold of everything.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you feel heat in the body, and it is due to the impact of some beasts' venoms, like a sea scorpion and wasp, and if corrosion occurs at the site of heat, then the cope, and it does not give any spice to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to the hand, if the cope is at the joint, if the corrosion does not come to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	If it comes to the elbow, if the cautery is at the cost.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	If it passes the cost, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And so entirely makes what the corrosion comes or pierce.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes in the first joint, if the cautery after another joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or pierce, if the cautery all the virtue.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it goes up in the leg, if the cautery at the joint of the great toe.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes from above the knee, if there is no other engine but to kill the patient.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the manner of coping with or treating the member if it is that you bind it and loosen, and extend some measures on one of the lings above, and others on the other ling below, and you sew the thread that is between the two lings at the widest part of the bone as long as the bone is discovered.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then the treatment or stitching, and use a different thread for each part, so that it does not touch the healthy skin, and go to the surgeon for another wound and gangrene.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the skin at once, or if you put on any constricting powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as soon as it is accomplished, then tie the injured limb with a flexile cord, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to my home in a short time.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	It appeared a black thing that seemed to be burning, and this corrosion came first in its youngest part, consuming the whole piece.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the wound was seen, if it could be closed, it became healthy.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And later when the wound was returned to the hand, it came to me, and I put on things with the effect of disinfecting after embalming the corrosive parts, and it could not stop the corrosions.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and I say that I will hold his hand, and I do not have hope of reflecting the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and it also doubts that if I cut his hand, he will not die because the strength of the hand was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became desperate, and returned to his land, and managed to save his hand, and he was healthy.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not heard of this before because we have other things to do, and we are used to it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never has an apoplexy come to the wild boar, and it takes as long as it takes for a great assembly of arrows.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then it cuts and pierces, and with a jump, it breaks the bow, and frightens the watchers, just as some hunters do.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	The skin that is covered is as delicate as silk, and does not cover the bone or the nerve, and such disease is so called "holy" but should be called "fissure";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it reaches the bone, then it should be called "fissure";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And if the skin is such that it cuts through the entire skin, and at the same time, it is as delicate as silk, like some hunters do;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not keep it for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are engaged and the hair does not become corrupted, and it is very thick, then the cure of clothing is easy:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the breasts are large, and the bow which is in it has a strong odor, therefore, the treatment with Egyptian medicine which is made here is:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take ashes, oil, and turpentine, mixed, and cook in one vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey:
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take according to your need, and make it in wine and honey, and cure the breast, and strain the pustule:
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by pulling it out.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this as many times as the breast is deformed and until the pain stops.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and never put ashes of smoke in the wound while this medicine is present, and if you use grapevine ash instead, and it causes pain, then remove it as soon as you feel that the breast is well-shaped.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, and the Egyptian medicine does not cause pain, then remove the ashes of smoke with honey or if there is a little bit of burning, it should be done.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	If you choose to rinse the wound with honey and wine mixture, where honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and wine makes it aerated and healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this, and you ensure that the wound is well cleaned, if the rinse of this what is made in the, and it is that you preignes emplaustre diafinit, and they make with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or if you rinse the wound with some medicines and ointments, which I have mentioned their properties or treated of ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the wound is small, and the rinse of the wound does not enter, if it is enlarged by a pin, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is eslargiez.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	When the wound is too large, if it does not bleed sufficiently, and the doctor allows it to only touch the skin or the clyster can enter, and if the pus that gushes out is green, then the doctor or lower down on the leg than it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the wound is fully formed, if it does not leave any space for the stitch;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you do not cover the wound with something like we have seen, if it appears in such a way that the wound correals to the lowest part of the leg where it is, since when the wound is fully formed, if it does not leave any space for the stitch, and if you do not cover the wound with something like we have seen, if it appears in such a way that the wound correals to the lowest part of the leg where it is;
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	That the bowel is cut lightly, and nothing of the bowel is left.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take consolidating medicines to heal the wound, and they are laid on a flaxen cloth that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then apply as much force as possible to the narrower part of the chest, and lay another flaxen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and place it over the wound of the sore to align the bowel, and do not leave the large cloth until after one more time.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one who is sore at the wound of the chest often presses on the bowel, and examines what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or not, or too much, or not enough, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, and if the patient feels pain or not, and when your medicine has been extended and you see the nature that it is ascending and if the chest seems to be already broken, and approach the health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then take off the bandage either in the morning or at night, and when you examine the wound, if it changes to another fold, and change the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after the year, it is advisable that the breasts not be exposed to the air.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venomous substances are found after a long time, do not despair of your health, as the health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For he has many times injured his wounds with sharp things, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the belly is indigestible and jumps after one night, thinks that the chest is not broken.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the shoulder is late in healing, and it is treated, if the dry medicines are moistened in substance and fresh in virtue, as specified, because it has a large part of vitrol, and this is the rear medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	If the ointment is specified, and it is made with rose oil, and the wine is mixed in small amount;
puis le confit et en use;	Then it is preserved and used.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And the same thing is made honey cooked, when the ointments are not present, or you take razor and oil and incense, and the powder, and the honey when it is on fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then in glue I drapel, and stretch it around the neck, and never once has an astrologer given any advice on this, and the roots of these celestial herbs, which is also like flour and cinnamon.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in use of simple or compound drugs:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	break them, and make a powder, and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is long, and not cured by this cure, then you should know that the decay has begun, and it makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment of the fistula cure is as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panacea is an aphrodisiac that often cures the thumb of the hand, or finger, or by chance in other parts;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is infected, and it is not guarded, if the aphrodisiac comes out, and runs and soaks the wound as far as the root of the finger, and by chance it runs all over;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And there comes the corrosion to the bone, as far as it comes with pain, and the head of the joint is wide, and the color is changed;
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that is growing from the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail presses on the bone, and begins to prick, and darkens, then you should remove the part of the nail that points at the bone, and cut it off high up, and cope with the remaining part of the nail subtly and gently, and put on the remnant of the nail with medicines that are hot and corrosive to heal everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if corrosion is in the bone, and it is coped, and taken out, because as much as the bone corrupts and is, so it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If you see the second bone corroded, if the copes in I are as described, then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is frozen, and cut it off, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary to first cleanse it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the nail of the frozen toe with a sharp knife, and make sure the cut does not go through the skin, because the patient will feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, then put something on that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the elbow
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The elbow dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is very common, and it often happens without causing any damage, and never causes a fracture, and no one is born with this deformity, or the birth is not in any of us from the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who do not move at all in any joint, and those who are moved at the frozen joint, by chance stay still.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of one who is lame is as follows:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The size of one who is lame is as the root of a wide spatule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who has pain in the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	If you hold tight to the pain.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the event of a fracture that needs to be treated from the back, if you are able to first cover the bone with a suitable cloth, then cover the bone with a bandage, and then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come are those that come from birth, or from wounds, or from burns, or from other things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you cover that spot with your hand, then it should repair according to its natural forms:
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then put between two cloths or flannels made wet with rose oil, so they do not stick:
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you put between two pieces of soft cloth, as long as it does not stick, if it comes out:
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When the patient touches either of his two hands with his thumb, if it is not too painful, then it should be done.
des vils	of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Giant veins filled with excess melancholic fullness come from more and more limbs of the heavy body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more come in the legs of those who go to church and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, it is necessary that you never administer any purging of colic, and then the proper dosage of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron cure is followed in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is to cut and draw the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is if you love the vein, and cut it all through.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is followed in this way:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, the first leg of the hot, strong ankle is raised until it is not subtle, then the knee of the patient is strained to the part below the knee of the groin.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then close the vein with your hand, either with one, two, or three fingers, of a large size, then lift and take out the dark blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as you can, as much as the patient's strength allows.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	Then tie it off and command that it be painted with black meat juice.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And continue the evacuation and cleaning as the veins become clear, and inform the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The lesions of the dislocated joint are caused in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Straighten the patient's leg, if it has hair, then wash it with warm water, and make the leg red hot until it turns red, and dilate the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a fire, if the cauterization is done with heat, and then the point is placed where the vein is long and thin at the head of the thigh, or in the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then apply the leather to the wound, and scarify the vein in every part, as soon as it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or the leather seems as if it were a bluish cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then bind the wound tightly, as soon as it is healed with leather, and then cut at the ankle lightly, then the thread is passed through the other leg, three times.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scorch the skin on the vein as much as it appears, then soften it with oil, just as you have done, and it can be used for another incision, just as you have done first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut a larger size, or more like it, then soften it, and then lay it flat, and then tie it to the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract the limb in the size, as far as it will go, then soften it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you do not manage to lift it and straighten it, if it does not come out with a needle as strong as double thread, then soften it, tie it, and pull it out, and cut your hand from both sides, until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and make sure it does not break, for if it breaks, and cannot be treated or lifted, it causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have fully treated it, place the wound of the hairy skin with fine linen soaked in wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and keep it until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the wound is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, but if you cut it off violently, do not cut it off, but if it is not straight.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and the skin is stretched as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron used when cutting the eye if it is hard, and does not cut through, is that it does not cut through the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is a thick nail, because if it were fine, it would cut through the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is joined in the legs, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance grows in another part than in the legs, and this comes from the fat that comes out of the skin, as it does from the tail of a snake and towards, joined between the skin and the arm.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, as if from the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head is opened, if you cover one end of a piece of lint with one and a half fingers, and hold it there, and leave the lint on the leg, and every time it is not closed, if the lint covers the end of the lint, and the now;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, if you cut off a part, and cover the remaining part with lint, and do not cover the root as much as it is all out;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it off, it will enter the body, and bring forth pus and blood, or the limb, and serious illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this particular thing, it is necessary that it be treated as soon as possible and quickly, and nothing else or more remains.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And there is no time for this vein when it is treated with V hands of length, or X, and some came to me before, which was X hands of length, and when you press, if it hurts or punctures, and the hole is small, then all is well.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter be digested, and administer the medicine to the patient without any food for one hour, then the cure is like that of the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And there is no time for this vein hands to be closed, and at the same time when it opens in the joint of the shoulder or the shoulder, and if there is pain, and it jumps out of its place;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	If you have followed our advice before, then you will know how to treat it.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of those that are born between leather and horsehair.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is known in our country as "beef disease," because it often occurs with many wounds, and is a sharp pain that travels from the skin to the bone, and goes up and down the entire body, and is felt throughout the limbs, until it reaches the skin or bone, and then it jumps.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by an excess of certain humors, such as worms that come and go in the belly, and snakes and limbs and Ascaris.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one wonders about its maliciousness, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and comes to the brain, by chance it enters, and destroys the brain.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and treated, if not, when it will be.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If it comes to pass that you read the lever of the shoulder and below a strong ligament well tightened, then pull on it and cut it off, and it will be firmly fixed in place, and you will not need to sew it, if the cauterization by fire is done as follows:
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it can cause, if it goes to the oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming towards or near the oil, hold it firmly by the horn, and cut off the cauterization; then pull it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	1. It is necessary to use the cautery of the maltreats to dissolve the solutions of drugs for the humors, and to avoid foods that are not pure for nourishment.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from dislocation
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	2. This disease is called "wakir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to any part of the body, and spreads from one part to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	3. And I see what you say.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	4. I was called to a woman who had been treated with a cautery, and I saw my arm, and saw a small pimple in the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	5. And later, I saw it rise as if it were a snake in the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as if it were living silver when it cuts through the flesh.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain leaves that limb, and it tightens in the shoulder, and then a while later spreads throughout the body, so much so that it comes to the other shoulder.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then it tells me that it dislocated itself further towards the front of the body, just as I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvel at how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wished for this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Indeed, I wanted to ensure that the pain moved from one part of the body to another, but I could not make it happen, just as I see in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	I thought it was because the woman had a stiff chest, and the veins were exposed, and because that constriction appeared.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it is not apparent to those who do not understand this reason that those who are delicate have moist skin and veins that have been replenished.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels pain, if it opens as we have said, if the limb is not held tightly, and then released as much as the constraint allows to the limb;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the limb;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you do not see it with your eyes, whether the cure of this that relieves the constraint is like pills made from the dried flesh of fish and other similar things;
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the bones of the hand or they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of their wounds is that some have large points, and small, and hairs, and sores.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those with angles, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and the one who does not find in any limb according to any way.
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principle member, if it is like the brain, liver, spleen, lung, heart, intestine, uterus, and other members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she finds that she does not find in any limb of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it comes to your mind that you should remove this arrow, because of the death that follows in many cases.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when you notice that it is not a lie, and the arrow is not in front, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of a fracture when the arrow pierces the bone, and the shock that is felt there is when there is scotomy and soreness and shivering and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of cold;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and by chance it is without eyes or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And by chance, the word and the voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and a leap of the white, moist wound, resembling a roar of a bull.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this is the sign you see, if you hold the cure, and draw the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it is drawn or pulled is that it is near the left shoulder, and it feels as if it is stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance, the arrow is also silent, and in black blood, and comes with cold and very cold, and sinks.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The patient does not doubt that the death has set in.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrowhead that does not come out is that there are no plains of ecchymosis, a sudden drop in the wound, the throat swells, and the face turns pale, and he sighs high and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrowhead is found in the covering of the chest, it is difficult to find the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and there is great pain and suffering.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and they move all the limbs of the shoulder.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	2. If the arrowhead is found in the stomach by chance, if it jumps from the wound nothing of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	3. If the arrowhead is found in the stomach and in a sudden jump through the intestine, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead is found in the bladder, and the urine comes out suddenly and forcefully, and the patient feels great pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	The patient suspects that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and chest and shoulder and arm and spine and back and shoulders, and the limbs seeming, are saved according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the artery is in the loins or the limb, and it is not visible, as I will tell you if I remember, because you are doing it.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It came to my home one day, a arrowhead that was thrown into the root of the neck.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to touch it, and from the other side, I removed the grease from the ear, and it was painful.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I found a bone that was stuck in the grease of the oil of the paper, and it was firmly fixed, and it could not be removed except for the tip towards the other side, and it was as large as a Turkish archer's arrow, making it easy to remove with light blows on the ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	I managed to remove it, and I never had any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I found a bone from the throat in a cheese, and it was the Arabic bone with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I was aware of the barbs, and they were very subtle as I touched them, and they were healthy crests.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	I touched a thorn in my foot, which was long or flat, and I thought it would kill me.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then if it had not changed its position after XXX days.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I removed the thorn, I applied pressure, and it stopped bleeding, and there were no other accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if your foot or leg has a wound from a thorn, and the wound is deep or large, and it does not heal quickly.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the thorn did not leave the wound, and it did not change its natural position, and it was not found in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see if another man, who struck a shaft in his face, was wounded by the wound.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and delayed before suffering great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	and did not have other similarities.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And shot an arrow at the king's son, who was swollen in the middle and was slightly bent to the left.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for the cure after it had been swollen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound was very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried to treat it with all my subtle methods and did not feel any pain.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a sharp and painful sensation in his left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought that it was the tip of the arrow I put the sharp, dry, and easily cuttable bone in the wound, because the arrow did not burn.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw that it was the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I inserted the sharp bone into the wound, and the right side of the skin was cut, and it took a long time for the pain to subside, until the patient felt the bone leave his body.
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied the medicated plaster to the wound, as thick as possible, and it stuck, and I felt the point of the arrow that was stuck in the skin.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then, in the opening of the wound, by the use of that medicinal herb, until the head of the arrow appeared visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And it took well over four months to heal, and then the wound was lanced, and I removed all the needles, both sides, and could not stop.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I continued to refine and invent methods of lancing, as long as the needles were well made, according to the form that would come at the end of this chapter, as I opened the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the bone was judged not to be able to be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I will restore it therefore, and was soothed by the wound, and was cured completely by the patient.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I said the quality of removing some arrows, if you put your care on what I do not say, because the books cannot all become dirty.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the skilled masters compare well with a few great things, and with what is present and lacking, true nine works, and nine instruments, in the descent of things that come into this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are fixed in four ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	If by the shoulder or if they enter, or from another part.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps out by the arm or it enters, is a wound that enters the flesh, and it does not jump out at all now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, if it leaves it as long as the wound is raw and open, and the exit is open.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it becomes stuck in the bone, and it cannot be pulled out if it is not left alone for a while, and each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps out, and if it does not jump now, if it is pierced from the inside as much as the wound is healed and made smooth, and then it comes out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the bone of the head, and it is reduced to one of the frontal bones, and some of the accidents I have mentioned occur to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If it is not burned, but left as long as it remains even after some years, because the shoulder dislocates, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the dislocation is not caused by the bone alone, and does not cause any other injuries, then the patient will not have any major problems with the engine.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it remains dislocated for a long time and cannot be reduced, if you do not seek medical attention immediately, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the shoulder as soon as possible to prevent further damage.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the shoulder is reduced to the head of the humerus bone and cannot be seen, if you want to try everything.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	If you feel it, if there is no instrument available for reduction.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	If you do not have the strength to reduce it, and for the sake of the wound, and there is no pulse or movement, if the pain is such that the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	If you reduce the arrow, and if it has ears in the shaft, and they hold, then the bone that is marked with II parts of the mace that you can pull, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow, as far as you can draw it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And carefully, even if you do not break the arrow, you should pull it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you do not once, if the hair is still long and even until it grows, then cut it, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the dislocations of the shoulder cause further harm, then it is not what we have advised in this chapter of the treatise.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And if you need the incision of the flesh and vein, and put in a comment that you can treat the arrowhead without causing harm, either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And put the patient according to the shape of the arrowhead when it was in the shoulder, because it is the greatest help to him, and if you do not know, then follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrowhead that comes from another part, or it does not open anything of his, or the skin is shrunk in some place where you can see or feel it.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	The head is then cut open, as soon as the nails can take hold, and then it is pulled out.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If you jump now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	The second line translates to: "And if it is held in the bone, if your hand turns round as it enters the bone, then it expands the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot come out, leave it for a while and then resume the extraction as soon as it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is the arrow, cut it off at once.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is not the arrow, and you see that the instrument is being administered, if the tip of the arrow is in the handle of the instrument, then it is not a problem.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then cut it off, and if the arrow is in the handle of the instrument, and the instrument is being cut at the tip entering, to lighten the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrowhead is embedded, then you must cut through the entire arm or the poison is released, and then treat the wound as best as you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	If the dislocation is in the shoulder, hip, abdomen, or chest, and it is forward, and you then cover it, it will hold.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and keep covering the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound, as best as possible.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the arrowhead's barbs that are used to extract arrows resembles the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are several ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed hair is like that of a squirrel's tail, with the point at the tip of the arrowhead, just as shown.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the tails to be driven and shaped is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Veins that are healthy have 31, if it has a head of 16, it means:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	The bats that are after the ears, which are called the "two herbs
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that appear in the temples
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the veins that are in the hairy parts of the eyelids, which are called "sprigs
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the head
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands that are on the cheek
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the veins that are in the lips of the mouth, and these are called "swollen" veins
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the veins that are below the tongue
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The bones of the arms that are commonly considered to be five in number are:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the humerus, which is the lateral side of the chest, and it is called the "shoulder bone" by people.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	The shoulder joint is called the "shoulder joint" by people, and it is composed of the humerus and the scapula.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The scapula is the shoulder blade, which is located on the side of the chest, and it is called the "shoulder blade" by people. It is situated below the clavicle and is the one that can be felt when the pouch is opened.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saved vein is the one between the auricula and the anus, and if it rains.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the thighs are three veins.
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is the vein that is exposed due to the scar on the opposite side of the chest, and the second one is the vein that is exposed at the ankle on the other side of the chest.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nise," which is in the ankle of the other side of the chest.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg, there are three veins exposed that are not those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears can be helped by old catheters and implants.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the quality of health is such that if I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and clean the limb or the wounds with a cloth as rough as hair.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then the patient's neck is strained, as long as the wounds are visible behind the ears, in the same direction as the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	If you want to tie the knots to your hand, and if you feel the pain in your thigh, then sign.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the scalpel, and cut through the vein just above the bone, then hold your hand tightly over all the wounds, and cut and sew the vein as well as you can, and make sure to remove as much blood as possible, and see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then the strain and pain, as long as it is healthy.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said the incision and the cauterization or first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating ancient, and soaked, and used to customary, and in the course of the watery tears have eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the health if it is so that I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient is straining his chest, as long as the two veins are open widely;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and you feel the cold breath of your dog, and then you see it increase;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then gently press on the vein at the top of your index finger, remove the lancet, and gently hold the vein and the capillary, just as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then remove the restraint, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then place cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then close it, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of its strength and extraction, where to begin the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein at the front is as good as the health of the cranial vein for old facial diseases, migraines, and bruising.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	If the patient is able to pull his neck back while twisting, as soon as the vein is exposed.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "forceps," whose shape is like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and hold it firmly with your hand or another object, and let the blood ooze out according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the patient's neck, and hold the vein as long as it is pulsating and never let go of it with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	In all cases, it should only be the flames that are too large.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And the safe way across, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the arteries when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The safety of the two veins that are in the two arms if they help the limbs, and the thigh, and the wound, and the orifice in the skin, and diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their safety if it is that the patient strains his neck by twisting without any ligament, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the safe way, and if the safe way is long, a short part of artery is broken, because there is no bone.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	If the flames are subtle, by chance they are very sharp.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make a deep incision, as much as you can, and then cut the skin, and it will heal well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein is not good if it is thin, and it can cause problems such as sores, wounds, and skin diseases, similar to eczema and rashes that occur in the skin, especially when they are old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of the skin is good if it does not itch, then gently pull the neck towards you, and take the subtle flame long and check if the eyelid is between the two eyes, because the vein does not open well, and now the pain will start to increase, and the wound will begin to heal.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not alert too much, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need, then lie down for a night, as it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The saffron of the second kind helps with the relief of colic, at the beginning of mealtime, and for many diseases, empetigines, corrosions, herpes, and esthenia.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the saffron if it is the patient who strains his neck on both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And if the master is standing on the chest of the patient, and the patient lies on his side, then the vein is stretched widely, then draw out enough blood, as much as possible.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then perform another incision in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and draw out the veins gently, so that the patient does not suffer.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it as is, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	If the health of the teeth of the deer is aided in the mouth, it helps to prevent decay of the gums, and cracks in the teeth, and toothache.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And assess the quality of the wound if it is necessary to tie the gauze in front of you, and pull on its collar as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the cheek, and look at the veins, one of which is on the left cheek and the other on the right, and distinguish them by their dark color and because they have thin dark veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	1. If you do not know how to do it, and you are in doubt, then try the largest one of each part, and do two wounds that are similar, because it is a different method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	The tongue of the sick person is diseased.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	2. If the wounds of the lips are not healed after the healing of the head, and it is the strangulation of the mouth, and there are diseases of the eyes, and there are diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	3. and if you can qualify the wound if the patient is between your hands before the sun, and you touch the tongue, and look at each costal bone a black wound;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The patient should exercise both sides equally, and not push too hard, as the arteries are on the opposite side.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins that are commonly exercised are healthy in two ways.
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	If pricked at all parts of the body, or with a thin needle like a thorn, and are called "aneth".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are large and thin according to the width and thinness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is such that it is named after a certain flower, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is able to open the veins with thick hair that contain large clots and trouble.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is the form of the thin needle.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	It is more delicate to apply, and it is safer for the veins, or if there is delicate sodium citrate.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The health of the basin, which is one of these veins, if it helps with diseases that are full of throat, and of collarbone, and of stomach, and of abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the physician that he cures wisely, and that he attacks the artery that is full.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and the blood comes out, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be too sharp-pointed the fire, but cut it as we can.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basin does not open clearly, then it is necessary to pull on it and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	If you do not want any rain from it, or if you heal in the vein of the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	It is open clearly:
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cloth is on fire, as we have said:
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the vein of the wound, then it is necessary that you hold the arm steady while touching the vein as far as you can feel the pulse:
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the vein to stop it, and then hold the arm steady, and touch the burning cloth:
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and make sure that you do not injure the artery when you see the vein swell, because it is the artery:
eschui la donques.	The first sentence to translate is "Eschui la donques." The translation of this phrase is not clear without additional context, as it does not follow a standard grammatical structure or provide enough information to determine its meaning. However, based on the provided text, it seems to be a command or instruction, possibly related to the previous sentence about dislocations. Therefore, a possible translation could be: "Show the way.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	The second sentence to translate is "Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:". A possible translation could be: "And if you see it coming out as high as the urine of a child, and it is red and thin, you should know that it is not blood:". This translation assumes that the sentence is describing a medical condition or symptom, and the use of the word "artere" (artery) suggests that the speaker is comparing the appearance of the discharge to that of an artery. However, without additional context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	The third sentence to translate is "Haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avaint:". A possible translation could be: "Hasten and place your finger far away, then observe if it is without pain, which often happens:". This translation assumes that the sentence is providing medical advice or instructions for a patient. The use of the word "estainche" (pain) suggests that the speaker is advising the patient to check for discomfort when placing their finger in a certain position. However, without additional context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	The patient should tie their arm, and leave it alone, and do not move the affected limb.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and remain still, and do not move until it is safe.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not dressed, and it becomes infected, and the doctor is not present, then the artery may open, as the head of the arrow retreats.
et estainche li sans.	and dress the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a scalpel, and make it sharp, and take one of the halves and hold it well against the other edge.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the wound is not dressed, that's good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, then if the treatment is poultices that draw out blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the poultices do not cause much pain in other positions due to the small wound of the wound, and the relief is given to the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The health of the vein in its environment is aided if it treats the wound with blood and corns, because it is composed of basilic and cerebral, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the patient to rest on the nerve that is inflamed, and if it does not become too much, and the nerve becomes inflamed, and the swelling increases, and the health becomes painful, and by chance it cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	When the skin is cut many times, and it does not open by itself due to its thinness, then you must use the instrument to open it.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And pull out the skin from your wound.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is vein between the two nerves, if they are not long enough.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	If the head wound is helped, it attracts blood to the head, and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is better to touch the olive or mint leaf, as it is safer for all wounds, because it does not harm the skin or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	In general, it is better to use a lighter instrument, and do not cause pain the first time, and then continue.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, some men have read it for the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about health, if it is not already known, is to keep it and avoid diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And make your health in one of the three veins that are cut:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	This is to know, the cranial, fast, and abdominal.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And you must take care of your health at the beginning of fasting, and during and after diving, when the sign of repletion appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And it must be done on the first day or the second, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The one who is being treated for diseases has no definite cure, but when it comes to relieving pain or fatigue, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary to treat children under the age of 14, nor women who are only a quarter of a month pregnant.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And if any is found to be healthier, in whatever way that may be, if it helps to open the intestines of a light cyst, if there are many feces retained, and if the wounds do not reach the intestines which are unnecessary and harmful to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Neither the fat nor the lean meat that is too much, nor the yews, whether it is or not, nor the hydropathic.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And it worsens the health after passionate colic, vomiting, abdominal dislocation, and frequent urination in women, traveling, and eating, and all the virtue, or by something of the arm or tight clothing.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the humors, if it is not thin, by meat and drinks and medicines, if you can afford it.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then take a bath or a wash, nothing helps, by refining the blood, and stay healthy until the third day, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep that of the day's work, and pain, and pleasure, and such things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be careful and vigilant, and use the more elevated of the two hands that you have, and gently rub the arm twice or three times, then pull the limb away in a straight line, as it is too tight or small, if it cannot be corrected without;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then gently rub the wrist with your hands, as long as the veins throb and you feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then use the more elevated of the two hands with a little oil, then place your left hand on the vein opposite the wrist as much as possible, so that the vein does not hurt or fail to heal;
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For it has veins that flow like cords to the healer, and if they are so many that they are plainly visible, then when one puts the fire on them, if they retreat from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if the vein is opened, then it is the wound too tight, because then the healer must be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if not, then it continues a little later in the same place or suddenly, if it is not shortened.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if it is read that it is deformed, and the patient becomes anxious, leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	By chance, chancery comes to visit.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter the bath, then resume the cure if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the wound is small, or it is not cut subtly and you doubt that there is not so much blood as you see, if proud in that wound you think it is true for all the fire, rightfully.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And the work is done quickly, unless the patient is deformed.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	When there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the flesh swell, if you do not recouple the joint, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the strong sinews, and makes them moist in this swollen part of the limb that the oil touches.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And frequently apply oil to the healthy part of the limb that you heal the wounds, to strengthen the strong sinews.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this method also helps to reduce swelling and pain when it is applied to the limb.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If it is too thin, do not apply it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If there are large abscesses that come many times, as soon as it is not healthy but only once when the vein is opened, if you hurry, and put a wet sponge on the affected part and wrap it with a cloth, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no swelling at the site after several days without any blackness or discoloration, if you do not know why.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, put nothing of aloe or re-set in the juice of camomile, myrrh, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times there have been abscesses and appearances of the health of the basilica.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Then place your hand on it, and if the appearance is severe, compress the hand with your own.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Do not place anything on it that we have said, for by chance in the incision without damaging the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but I apply it dry to make it hurt the limb, then another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	2. And treat each sin according to its quantity and the color of the sin.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it remains without blood, if it is left as red as possible.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it large, if you let it be as fine as possible.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, then let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is good for the one who is in pain and suffering, and has experience in extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it will be healthier and often, and it should be made stronger by cutting through, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this way of strengthening is saved from the recurrence of blood and nerve weakness, and it is worth noting that the long wound is not wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose heart needs strength, it is good to give soft bread in the juice of grenaded pomes.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is frozen, if it drinks thrice or four times cold water. And if it has a cold complexion, if it presses before the warm bread dough into honey or honey aromatic with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he sweats after being made healthy, after the passage of blood, if it is necessary that he sweat char and sweet-smelling honey, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of sincope, for the evacuation of wind.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he sees his arm swelling and becoming redder each time, if it happens, when he is weakened by great pain, which he becomes more and more weak, according to the amount of his virtue which continues to increase.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If he sees his arm swelling and becoming redder after the first time of pain, and he feels strong, if he is healthy seven hours after the first pain, or after the next hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	If he seems to be getting stronger from another part, if he needs to be stronger on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has thirst for blood that the body which is already frozen has, and brings on fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it comes to draw great quantity of blood, and open the abscess as much as it can.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then that you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the wound as soon as it is clean, so that the death does not come from the pus, and this often happens when the healthier ones are neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	When you see the arm slip out of its place, and make it bleed again, and the wound is closed, then you must form your fingers tightly.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If the arm is stiff, then extend it gently, as that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But leave it alone until the second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Or you do not cut at the tip of the flame, until the part that is frozen from the vein oozes out and put it in boiling water, and gently press it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is inflamed, if it is left and not tightened, as long as the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If necessary, treat the blood twice, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in another arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The arm that holds the vein is healthy because it is composed of the shoulder.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to clean it if the patient boils their hand in hot water until the redness subsides.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it is linked in a proper manner, if the vein appears well, then the proper way now through, no large or long wound.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And the wound is large, and is healing well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, then place the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow through it until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if this is not possible, then place the hand in warm water, as it will be more in the pit than here.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The healing of this vein is more safe from all other veins, than if it has not been cut or nerved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the saved hand is worth all the diseases of the left hand, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and pour hot water on it until the vein is cold, if you can;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you can pass your hand through it, and if it does not hurt at all, then there is no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not force it too far, because the bones are dry and lacking in cartilage, and then put your hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated as much blood as is customary for your skill, if you put the vein oil and seal it tightly, and then make a thread for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient with the injury in the left hand if it is of the mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the sore if it is of all diseases that are not good for the heart, like diseases of the lungs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the arms, and legs, and old wounds, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its healing if it is that the patient can pass his hand in hot water and fry the vein as it bleeds, and then loosen the joint without pain.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	When the vein is at the ankle, and by the doctor's order, it should not be pricked with a needle.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	If the vein is small or large, or at the ankle, it is worth mentioning.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you follow your doctor's order, if there are nerves that are not in place, and the vein is traversed as it should be.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	And the blood flow is normal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you cannot cleanse it with soap, then put your hand in the fire and let the vein dry out well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the patient improves the first time, if the second time it does not last more than a short time because the disease is salt.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and now I will make a salve of the other doctor in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The salve for the sciatica wound is at the ankle of the foot, and its effectiveness is equal to the pain of the thigh, when it is full of pus.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his health if he has been or bathed, and draws out from his ankle four times in twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, then the healthy person in all ways that you can think of, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worth copying, for the text is read and it is returned to male hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not copy, then no healthy person of the one who opened or at the back of the door, and towards the little door, and it will be granted to you.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And make so many incisions of blood that you see, and then the link is cut off, and it is tied with thread and it is tightened.
ele est maintenant sanee.	The patient is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	Of wounds from ventouse
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuum pumps are made of horn, or iron, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and vacuum is created in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this vacuum creation, which is made by cutting, is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is entirely on fire, or on fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and the vacuum creation that is made by cutting and extracting blood is made in twelve hours, with all the wounds being completely closed.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is left open.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two more in the other cheek;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction of the mouth;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction of the other two shoulder blades;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction of the groin;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suctions of the inner arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suctions of the legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suctions of the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction does not treat any blood, rather it is for thin veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore it does not cause any harm, as we do with wounds;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is only necessary that it be moistened, and not with any fire or heat, in no disease that comes from overeating, as long as the chest is dry.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity comes from diseases, or for habits, if the midwife comes every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and also in each ten;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they have to assist at childbirth, have heavy burdens.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And if there are those who, when they become swollen and bleeding in their face, in their cheeks, and at the navel, and in the belly, have heavy burdens.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who have a thirst for blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit out blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	If they have such things as wounds that prick, and see blood and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and at the same time when it is three hours after midnight, we command our patient to fast.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the liver helps in the treatment of long hair… that comes as it is, and it is only necessary after the evacuation of all the blood.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this ventilation is in the head of the liver health, and it is only necessary for those who have a cold complexion or who have been struck, because this does great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And that's why it is only necessary for the watchmen to use those who have or not cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often get better soon become obligated, and for this reason, the fasting should be made longer due to the fear of non-compliance.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The patient's neck winding is in the chest of the main and the basilica, and for this it is useful in the emergency of the pinch, and for the cutting of the bone of the ear, and to all, and for filling;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is meant to be tightened, because it holds too tightly, if it causes indigestion or stomach and or liver;
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The winding of the collar is as the costels of the neck, and it causes pain in the head, and it hurts and pulls, and in the strangulation, and in the pain of the roots of the teeth, and it is in the chest of the main;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to express their hand when putting on, so as not to harm the artery and cause further wounds.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The windings of the throat are often due to disease of the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, as well as similar diseases in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And it is found in the lips of the cold sweats of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The second line of the translation is: "Wounds on the shoulders are caused by diseases that come from chill and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The windings of the cheeks are as much as three fingers of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the patient not to draw too much blood, because the vein is naked and knows how to avoid nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The device that is placed on the chest if it is not done with great care can cause injuries and diseases, and it must be large enough to have the ability to well treat.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it is not done subtly, it may break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and it causes great pain.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	If the devices on the legs are open, they attract blood from all parts of the body and relieve old pains from the arms, uterus, bladder, and vagina, and draw out the hair.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are on the limbs of the second and third toes, and all of them cause pain in the body after being worn for a long time, and bring about swelling in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner to insert the bougie (cannula) if you put it initially empty, and then subsequently, and move it gently, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and swollen part of the urethra, and the opening of the abscess.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then, close it, and put the bougies back in their original position, as some have such a problem that they cannot manage to hold them.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	If it is necessary to cut once only, and make large incisions, and a smooth surface.
et suce legierement.	and then gently suck.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if it is not thin, if it cuts twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to subtly open the vein of large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it is not done quickly, then it can be injured for the third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we want to draw out small amounts of blood only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we are not afraid to draw blood often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if it is not done quickly, then it should be stopped if the pain is severe and noticed immediately, and for those who have thick skin and hard hair, and who have long nails, that you oint the ends of the veins with the oily, dissolving ointments of the apothecary:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is of this nature, from oil of saffron, or sweet almond oil, or oil of the seeds of cucumber.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is of this kind, from the oil of lemon, or lavender, or chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take warm oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and apply them.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is tender and large pores, it is not recommended to apply oil, but it is recommended to wash after the application of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or onion water, or porcelain water, or any other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if the one with wet moisture, if it rises from honey, or rose water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive superfluity rise from wine vinegar, or ague of seuc, or decoction of anet or chamomile, or other similar ones.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not necessary to take a cold shower before the bath, but after the bath, an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not fall asleep after the ventilation, and it is necessary to wake up when it is time to ventilate and when it is being ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And if the one who is healthy is cold, and the other is too much and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it is necessary to consume cold things, such as lettuce and endive and spinach, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink punch, and hot charcoal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And if the one with a cold complexion consumes honey syrup and aromatic wine that is between vinegar and wine, and drinks punch, and drinks punch and small pieces of cheese and pickles.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	When the joint is dislocated, if it must move more than a little, then it requires more drinking than urine.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	It is necessary to give some men once a triaicle or muscate before the operation, or afterward, to comfort the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And make sure they are quiet without, but only those who are drunk should be made quiet.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The vents that are made to hurt are those that are made above the liver, and the gallbladder, and rheumatism, and the stomach, and the bowels, and the intestines, because this member does not suffer from external wounds, and only from internal pain when we make it move from one part to another, as we do with the uterus when it is unhealthy.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	For the viscosity that is in the member, if we use suction on the abdomen and the belly to relieve the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And ease the pain, when it is inflamed or pierced, if it is attracted by chance to the inflammation, or if it pulls away from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And it is done when it is placed on the liver and the mouse when it has retained inflammation, and these suctions are administered empty by sucking only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And never have they been administered together with fire, and never have they been thinned with cold tea, as in some diseases that cause sorrow, and in this way one fills the suction with hot water or with water that has been cooked with edible herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cautery is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half palm-sized scales on each side, and it either costs a little too much for the little pus, as if to bush a needle, and it is of rainwater, so that it does not rust the surgeon's hand when putting it on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and in the environment, it has a tooth of rainwater or iron to wear a tight glove, and it is both large and small according to the diseases and the pain of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suction cups of children are not like gills, but thin and lean.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should one put this suction cup on the limb?
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	The patient should use the wax cauterization or liniment and insert it into the hole through the vein that has been made, so that the wax is at the end of the vein hole to prevent the heater from burning the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the affected part, and you should be at the vein that we have mentioned, if you see, if there is vapor coming out, and then remove the vein.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and use the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you have skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the vein that is in a state of distress due to coughing and cold, there is no hole or windpipe, and it is not in a state of being until it is clear of the cold, and it is placed on the affected part only.
et c’est li forme:	1. "And it is the form: [the following lines are missing]
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without being harmed, only in parts where there can be ventouses for their small size, like lips and genitals, and similar parts.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in them of horsehair, if they are not or not, and other similarities.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the hair if it is that when you find wet hairs that are not rough, and if they take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and they put a nut in wet hair, as long as they are not pregnant, and have no belly.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then it is clean of the vein and the wound, then clean the member as much as it is red, and put on the hairs.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	When they are flat and smooth, and if it is the shoulder or neck, put a pocket around it, as this is best.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the arm from the shoulder, and then from the elbow, well, and then straighten it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	If it is too tight after the arm is straightened, if the cold wet linen is not stretched enough, then put it on, as long as the arm is not stretched out.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	If the linen is multiplied, then put on vitrol or gas, and similar things, as long as it is stretched.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	If you put half of the burned skin on the thigh and leave them as they become dry on the thigh, it will now be firm.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you use more of it, if you take others without.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the threads will not take, if you clean the thigh with cold water or use a needle as follows: first insert it, and then place them as they feel the cold, until they dry.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are cold, if you powder a small piece of aloe and silk or charcoal, it will now be cold.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	Many chapters are necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	1. "Consider the force of the fire cautery, that the patient will not find any ancient books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	2. "And for this reason, the science is strained in our land, as I have never found any book.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	3. "And I have not found any book, for the science is strained in our land, as I have studied many books and through experience and habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	4. "And I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the strangulations that are made, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the sum of words and chapters or the surgeon makes his understanding, and more so if those who have practiced it understand and learn this noble art, and learn to teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or sprain occurs at any joint, if you quickly apply the remedy of both sides of the malady, nothing will fail, as with weakness of the heart, or children, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if it is not very tense, or too tight.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and if it is too cold, it is known as cold baths, and hot iron and horsehair, and do not drink wine, nor use thin-willed charcoal, and do not fill the veins with blood too much, as long as you have no doubt of apoplexy chaut, or expansion of matter in the member.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient examines the member after his first treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient from the diet of meats that cause large excitements, or if there is viscosity, like bread cooked in hot water, and tests, and pies, and sausages, and lard, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the excitement gets worse and the fracture heals faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you know that bones broken by fractures and decays cannot be well mended or strengthened according to their nature by the care of members, nor also those which are too soft, like small children's bones.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, first reset the broken bone and large tendons that were split and joined together, as it should have been before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not let it stay in its place, and for this reason it is recommended to avoid large meals, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that there are many ways to cut.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the cut of the head is different from the cut of the leg or foot, and I will tell you all the ways of cutting in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a cut that goes to the bone, and another that only scratches, like the size of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a cut with wound, and a cut is just a small slit.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to have its engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes into his mind.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone by what is in his mind, and is open well by pressure, and some by hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when he has no knots in his way and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	However, it may have knots, or twist, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you can only move it with your hand, but use the medicines that will come after, and then gently pull it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know that the fracture that will be in place is the two parts that are disjointed, and it is now necessary to put them together as evenly as possible, unless they cause pain.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	When the inflammation subsides and the pain comes, if it is not left alone for any length of time, it will increase.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then, gently press the affected area with your fingers, and you will notice that the restoration of the joint is lighter than the restorations of other parts or when there are fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then, pull gently, as it should be done after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if it is in the bone with pieces broken off, if you can remove it by hand, or with your fingers, or with some small limbs, or with a cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And he puts the limb in its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are adjusted, it is held by your hands as you please, and you must ensure that the pain does not return to the injured joint.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And it feels good in the hand if it seems not well:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it grows well and is not overstretched, and does not press too much, do not apply pressure like those who make their wounds larger and contract the limb, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are swollen, if the patient is careful not to move them at all, neither during the day nor at night, nor when turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure that the limbs are not painful.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, if it is not swollen, and it is necessary to put the limb in a position so that there is no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep it in its place, so that twisting does not occur when you put it back together.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It is said that the broken limbs are various in size, width, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For if he has eaten members, like bread and such, and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	If it is necessary to cover the edges of linen and silk with something:
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those that are large, like a kex and a leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	If it is necessary to cover the large linen and silk sheets because they wrap around the entire limb and pull at all parts equally, unless there is any flaw:
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then lightly sew the legs three times or four according to the size of the limb, and then tighten your hand a little on all the linen, then go to the end of the wound and tighten less than the wound, which the wound can enlarge a little;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And gently bend the limb little by little, as you pull on a large part of the healthy leg, then repeat the other limb, and turn it to the correct side over the broken joint.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go to the part opposite the break, and extract it gently, not too hard or too forcefully, as we have said in the first chapter;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the wound edges of linen or cloth, as it is even, then sew it all with threads and then put your stitches well made on, if there is no gangrene or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	If it has swollen or become infected, and it is made to rest with things that relieve inflammation, and it is left alone for a while.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain your belt, and be made of half a wide rope, or of fur from which they make clothes, or of rains from palm trees, and be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the belt that is put around the wound be a little larger and wider than the others:
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be as long as it is necessary for the member of small or large size:
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then tighten the belt as you did in the first place, then tie a string around it, as you did in the first place for the wound:
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	As the joint is stretched further, less.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	It is necessary that the string be thin and not too thick, and be of linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the string is too thick, as I have seen the works of the weavers who make the hours of the linen ropes, and it is a great error, for the thread cannot be even if it is too fine, and it only requires that there be less space between each thread.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	When the patient is anesthetized by the heads of the pins after being shaved clean, if they are not soaked with oil, or greased, if it does not cause pain.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is treated with a bandage, and the edges are torn, I will explain the treatment for this after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is difficult to avoid breaking all the limbs when pulling on the pins every time.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put on these larger sizes if after V years or VII, or according to your size of the aposteme that is causing the problem.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it comes to pass that you take flour that is fine and well ground, and mix it with a large amount of water, and make this dough, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore the fracture in other positions, and at the same time for women and young children, because it is neither too hard nor too wet.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of fracturing and dislocating and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take barley, flour, oil, and Arabic gum, and mix them together in the ratio of 1:10.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	1. "Mirrors and aloe, ana V З." - This phrase is not clear without additional context. It could be a reference to a specific medical tool or technique, but without more information, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.
alechil VIIII З.;	2. "Alechil VIIIII Z." - This phrase is also not clear without additional context. It could be a reference to a specific medical condition or treatment, but without more information, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	3. "And then make powder, and mix with animal urine;" - This sentence suggests that the next step in the process is to create a powder using animal urine. The exact purpose of this powder is not clear without additional context.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	4. "If the complexion of the face is hot, then use this ointment, because it has good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial for many men." - This sentence suggests that the ointment has the ability to heal broken bones and restore the complexion of the face. The exact ingredients or application method are not clear without additional context.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Other method of plastering that is worth trying:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	prepare mud and straw, in the ratio of 1:1.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	mix with water and aloe, in the ratio of 7:1.
acaice VI З.;	add ice, in the ratio of 6:1.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	mix with arsenic and boil well, then cook with vinegar or beer, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of plastering for joints and bones that are dislocated from their place, to relieve the pain and size used for the bone, and the fracture:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	prepare new linen, and grind the mud and oil cooked, and put on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore flesh, but they are useful for reducing swelling and relieving bone pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Other method of plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Use oak bark, dry earth pottery shards, and mix them together to make the plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of treatment for bone fractures and to help reduce swelling: take red clay and mix it with honey and apply it to the limb.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Use the root of St. John's wort, chamomile, violets, and flour of wheat for each ingredient.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	And mix it with wine, and apply it to the wet or dry elderflower tincture, or other tincture, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method for cleansing more effectively than the first, when an abscess is present and the limb is to be restored.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Use the root of St. John's wort, linseed, madder, honey, and a pinch of each ingredient for each part.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	When the bone is broken, and it is set with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the inflammation of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that no matter how broken the bone is, it can be restored by making a mortar of wax and oil, and nothing else is needed, and he says that it should not be too soft or too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen says that when restoring a broken bone, one should put on things that are dry and warm, like mirr and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to emphasize that it is a wound and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take a piece of cloth and needles of copper, or threads of silk, and thread it, and sew it well, and the wound, and then make an emphasis on it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then the patient should wait a while, and take care not to cause pain to the patient, nor to move the bones of his leg.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	unless it is done by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	If pain comes to the limb, or itching, tingling, or swelling, if you hurry, and remove it, and now apply the plaster.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and gently wrap it, and wet with seawater, and immerse in cold water, and lift the limb as much as the itching stops, and soothe the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, wet with cold water or rose oil, and wrap around it, until you are sure of no infection.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then resume the application of the linen cloth, a little plaster, and do not strain it too much.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that gangrene has set in and there is bruising and pain and swelling, and you have the skill to plaster and bind, if it recurs, as you did at first properly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing happens to the limb that we have said, then do not delay more than three days, or four, or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leave it for more than twenty days, according to what is seen, as long as the splinting remains in place and approaches the carpal bone of the hand.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	However, the restraint is greater than the first, and it increases its flesh, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb drying more than it should, there is no doubt that the wound will not heal.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	The first sentence translates to: "Rise when the feverish heat arises, every time you feel it, and keep the limb still.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	This sentence translates to: "Due to the feverish heat, the nerves in the limb become numb, and they cause the patient to lose control of the limb, resulting in it being misaligned.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This sentence translates to: "It is unfortunate, and if it continues, I can only offer you pain relief and proper treatment.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounds
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	This sentence translates to: "There are many types of wounds, and various forms, and the causes are assigned.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	Car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d'espee, et le col et les os sont déchiris.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Et c'est pour cela que cette façon de brisure est appelée "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or le dentel est coupé par les sens perciers, et est appelée ceste façon de brisure "absolue".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Et est la plaie des deux grandes ou petites brisures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has an impact that is buried, or a cut or from the shattering of the edge, or from the piercing beneath the pierce, or from other such things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent wound, which is close to the skin that is loose from the bone, or it is under the bone, and this is the wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	Et si une plaie est recouverte dans l'os comme des chaussets, et est une petite fendue, et pour cela est appelée cette façon de brisure "capillaire".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	If the wound is caused by injury from piercing, or choking, or something similar, and it allows the piece of bone to enter, and it is the same as when they make the hot iron enter the heating;
si entre li piere dedens.	If it enters the wound.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And there are more who have been hurt by moist bones, like children's joints.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and come in all these ways of fracture that light pieces are broken if they are like these.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak about it in his ear.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	2. And let us know all ways of fractures by the dislocation they cause, and through inquiries made, and by the crooked one that is caused.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	3. The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone, and one rubs it with fire, if the dark fracture is not open, it is not true.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	4. In the treatment of the fracture, keep a close watch on the patient, and if you see no such accident, then it is like vomiting of cole, and admission of understanding, and extension, and pulsatility, and fever ague, and the wounds issue and redden, and other signs appear in various dispositions, unless it can be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you expect a cure to begin.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the first pain comes to you, and it is in the rib, if it comes before the fourteenth day, then you should see a bone surgeon.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this way, if you haste to see the bone before the ninth day, then the cloth that covers the bone is corrupting, and the accident we have mentioned comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture comes near the skin that covers the earlobe, then you must cut off the damaged part.
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it comes that you ignite the head of the patient's shoulder, and cut through the bone in all ways that you can, and through the figure of the wound more so than you can, and it dislocates from the sinus coming to reveal the bone, or abscess, if it helps with what comes, and it comes that you fill the shoulder with softened oils in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the abscess is healed and is assured of dislocation of the sinus.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then the bone begins to osteotomy, and it is done according to two ways of opening:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	The first line of the translation is: "If one manner is such that you cut at the narrowed end, and it is shaped like this:".
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then there is another cut of a larger size than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second line of the translation is: "And if you have many different-sized blades, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And in light work, if you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and dense, then you must perforate it with great care, otherwise you will injure the bone with sharp tools. It should have a margin or a circle around it that does not allow the tip to pass over the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you will have more, if every bone in your shoulder fits perfectly, if you have paid attention to this test.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And it is the form of the three ways of testing:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality of feeling through the broken bone is that you place one test on the bone, and turn it around as much as you can until you feel that the bone is perceived.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then place the other test a little further on, and then feel all around, then cut into the edges of the bone that are between the holes, and do it as subtly as you can, and gently, as we have said, as you draw the bone with your hand, or with any of the nails, tenailles, pinceures.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And keep your hands away from the skull and the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	When you have the bone perceived, and treated, if it comes that you reset the cut made in the bone with another instrument seeming like a cautery, but it should be more gentle and subtle than the other cautery;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it does not cut any of the small bones, nor the lighter ones of the bones, if they are slightly torn by the strips;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with tent and bandages that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other way of opening is when it is said by the Galenic method, which is more correct;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the loud one very much, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the open fracture is located, so that when you have removed this part, if you measure from the root of this incision, the form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and the other part is turned in two pieces, if the cutting is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then firmly with a small nail, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and then well be careful of the cloth that is soaked.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is near the bone, if it touches the bone lightly, because it feels badly, and causes pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	When the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only covered by soft tissue, and it has small pieces, if they are covered by that roughness, and file down the scales with a subtle raser, you must have several quantities of it to meet each need according to the degree and appearance of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use a coarse raser first, and then a softer one afterward, and continue to do this as much as it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other haircuts and subtle wounds, it is necessary to follow according to his command.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be answered by the one who placed their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the suture is discovered, then it is necessary that you apply a piece of linen to the wound according to its size, and grease it with rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another piece of suture doubled in II or III, and grease it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first suture.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you please, as you do not grease the suture, and maintain it with another piece of linen, and do not strain it too much, only as it touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And let it lie for one or two days, until the wound is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines as follows: roots of various kinds, flour, powdered frankincense, aristolochic acid, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And make a powder of these things, and place it on the wound, and administer further medicine without bittering.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And make sure the wound is clean, and do not apply ointment, nor stitch it up, because when bowstrings are assembled on the skin, they can cause great pain to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	When one puts on a piece of clothing that bites, it can cause discomfort.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	When a sudden accident comes to the patient, if no one is present, it is uncertain what to do, as we have said, if there is any doubt in the matter.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the blacking does not come off except with medicine, which we have applied, then it is recommended that you put a part of honey and three parts of olive oil and one part of glue in a pot, and then apply it to the clothing.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment is carried out in various ways, as necessary, to make it healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Scars that are never broken are the two parts of the skin that are not cut, or only one, because they are bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And this is cartilage, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	If one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off your small toe or nail and make the break as equal as possible on your thumb index, and in the pouch according to its natural form.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this lightly, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the part of the toe that does not touch the ground, and cannot be reached by the big toe, then you should place it equally at the base of a large finger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	If the break is in the second part, then you should repeat the action, and if you are able to restore the first joint, then do so.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If this is not possible, then after the ninth or tenth day, when the wound has healed and the patient is calm, cut off the toe or nail that is causing the pain, and if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	If you cut one part, the other will also break.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and if they are large, they fill the cavities with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no restorer says we must smooth the edges in burr, and each one dies every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It seems only then, but they must be made in the form of uff's flour and powdered milled;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the dressing, as long as the bone is firm, and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And no time should you cut or pull out the wings of the goose from the wounds, and if the skin is hanging loosely, and holds tightly, and blows the salves among;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	When the hot iron comes to the skin while you are working, if it touches a piece of wool or silk that is slightly oily or in a pouch of alcohol.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come out, apply plaster made of flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put on light sponges, and do not tie it too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the wound is small and it is torn into fine pieces, if the extraction is done with suitable tools, then cut the skin, and the cure of things enchanting charms, and soothing, if like plasters and ointments are suitable for this;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no wound and the patient is healthy, if the cure of tentacles occurs and he puts in pins, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not deep, but only slightly so, and it is not broken into pieces, but rather bent slightly, like a bow. If it is noticed, it can be gently treated.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary to note that if the fracture is on the left side, you should cut your finger in the mouth of the helper.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, cut your finger on the right hand, and lightly cut the fracture, and do it with the other hand in reverse, and hold steady.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is described in two parts, then it comes that you administer extension of two parts, as long as it is equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth move or fracture, if they are pulled from a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put it on the broken mandible, and put on two folds.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place under the louse a well-made iron nail, or a piece of leather similar, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it to the mouth you choose, and instruct the patient to lie down, and give him light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	If you see that the figure changes, if it moves too much, and then return to the point where it was originally;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply plaster with flour from the grinding mill, or sisal thread, after you have set the lice;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and apply the plaster on the inside of the lice, and when it is dry, press it onto the skin, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it remains healthy;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	The patient's condition improves after three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscess bursts, if we have not said this many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound in the same bone, it is repaired with a small piece of bone.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If the bone has thin and flexible parts in this area.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is large, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have all these pieces, and there is no lack of pain, if the wound is wide, and it is large, and put on flexible dressings at this point, to ensure health until it is cured.
de la forcele	of its strength.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The break occurs more often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is repaired in three ways.
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or, it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or, there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the dressing should be changed as soon as the wound is sore, if you have two assistants, so that one can hold the injured part while the other changes the dressing.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and he extends the other arm towards the part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the incision at your two fingers, if it forms as it should, and there should be no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have to extend further, if you place the elbow of the patient against a round object such as a spoon or a ring, and it is large according to your need.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and stretch and lighten the force, and hold the sphere at your hand, if you place the incision exactly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	1. If you do not treat the head of the strong force, because it comes in front, then the patient's strength will increase, and they should take care of their shoulder or ear, and hold the muscles of the shoulder, until the bone of the strong force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then direct the incision to your two fingers, and if you break the bone, it should be cut off. If you manage to do this, you will succeed.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	And then cut through the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, if it is one of the incisions you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	But make sure to use enough force with this instrument to ensure its effectiveness.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	And it seems like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the hand.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And it has two ends, as you see, and the larger ones should be wider than the others, as the fracture of the wound you made when you treated the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	When you are sure of the incision point, if the wound is small, and if you doubt the incision point, if you use the wound of linen and tapestry, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	2. And if apostemy is large, it comes, if you have a lot of cloth in oil and wool and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The stripping of the bone, when it is sensitive to pain and to the tailor's cut, is that you place on the bone the pulverized powder of millstone and oakum of mackerel, and light sponges on top, and a small dot of glue at the seam, if you can;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very thick band of a palm leaf, then put on a double fold of cloth, and apply it;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a small needle of III degrees wide and long, and wrap it around the bend, so that the head of the bend remains stable.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And put the needle on the bracelet, turn the bend over the shoulder, and unloose the healthy arm, and unloose the injured arm.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And tighten each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the bracelet firmly, and you see clearly that the needle does not move on the broken bone, then reward each one, and when you untie it, if the restraint is loose.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	1. and make the patient lie down on his back, and he puts when he falls in little oil on the wound to lift the assistant up high.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	2. if I align the fracture by the alignment of the shoulder, or you lay the arm at the collarbone, and it does not slip out of place accidentally, it holds for about 20 years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	3. then continue the cauterization, if you see that it has merit, and hold and let go as soon as it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	4. and it is restored in 28 years at most, and without any harm to men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the injury to the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	A sudden injury occurs when the shoulder breaks or becomes too wide due to the bone not being in its proper position, and it does not heal on its own, only through touching.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If the limb appears to match the shape of the fracture, and it is reshaped according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put powdered sulfur on the limb with a lot of heat, and light, and then make a double fold;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put a large and thin plate on the limb, a little wider than the shoulder, and if it is not evenly placed, use a plate made of flax threads to adjust it perfectly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	Then the patient is held tightly in one firm bond, so that the joint does not move from its place, and watches each hour.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	Whenever it is mobilized, if the patient holds it, and places the joint in its place, and sees the physician on his chest;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the muscle is restored in XX hours or XXV.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When these numbers are completed, if the patient leaves, and is sure, because it is only lightly heavy that is set;
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	When a piece of bone sticks out, and there is no flesh to cover it, if it is left untreated, and the bone, and we do what we have said in the fracture of the force of easing abscess pain.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The weight is never broken in the environment, but this comes rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it often breaks in the joint.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the bone, if it is not adjusted correctly, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of nourishment, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration if it is that the patient's arm breaks at his shoulder, and he inserts a gusset between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two costals in your hands, and subtly puts them equal to all the ways you can, as long as the bone looks like it should;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then put on bandages and threads of salt or another light substance, and wrap it around the subtle edge of the bone, or another light substance, and tie it around the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the line around back, and pull it with force, and reward each hour the hair, and if it becomes loose, then the pull.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it becomes loose, either due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, if you haste, and loosen, and rinse the wound, and address whatever came from methods of treatment.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reset the wound, and pull as long as it is safe.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breast wound
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Scars that the fracture of the ribs only comes when they are large after the back, and at the head of dens, and do not bend unless it is because they are greasy.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And the sentence feels well in the inquiry, I must.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restorations are such that if you put the wound evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the plaster, and draw it tightly with an arrow, if you have the skill.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the costal fracture is inclined towards the dens, it feels very painful and tense, like tears, because it does not have flesh.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it is full of points, and all is vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have put much faith in it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it is necessary to administer foods that inflame the belly, to fast the breast.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, that apostes does not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, then the safe one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And none of them say that they put winding tubes in the limb, because they are made of sugar, and it seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Indeed, there is doubt that the winding tube does not draw out the superfluities from the limb because of its weak position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them say that you should cover the shoulder with fine oiled cloth, and then put tents between the ribs to measure the limb accurately, then treat pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	When the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone that presses on the tissue, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut off part of the costal cartilage, and it is necessary to put an instrument to ward off the face.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And therefore it is necessary to cut into the bone, and remove it lightly, and then cut the edges of the wound if they are large, and dress them with plasters as soon as possible.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses come, then put on oiled cloths, and on the wound.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	While the patient is in this position, treat the affected limb according to the rules of apothecary, and make sure the ribs are not broken on the cost.
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Never has there been a fracture of the collarbone, and it has never happened before.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to none, and you see if it will be safe or not, if you see the hands mollified and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you touch them with a needle, if it does not hurt.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Dangerous that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they are held and do not hurt when they are stretched, dangerous that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put it in care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of the bones, and if the accidents are in hands, and on the back there is a sudden fall and a ventile with voluntary excretion;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	When one has cut at their belly and it feels like a desire to evacuate.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is fed on its back and it sees it asleep, if it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Mortal wounds:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If they do not labor in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if that accident does not come, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that if it has an abscess, if you put on olive oil or wool grease, until it is calmed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on a comfortable plaster and let it dry, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where you feel the pain, as long as you are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	If any bones break, then cover them with a cloth.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	If the bone is large, then sew the two sides of the wound together as tightly as possible, then apply a poultice of uncooked animal fat to keep it clean and healthy.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	If the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone," take your left hand's purse and place it on the other hand's thumb, then place the splint and tape over it, if you are able.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then hold it in place, and if it is broken, then cut it off, and the bone, and treat the wound as much as possible to keep it clean and healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	When the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, unless there was some previous injury to the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And it becomes very long, and descends into the jaw, and there comes pain in the head, and tenderness, and swelling of the part that is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration, if you extend your hand as far as the fracture site;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and trace the fracture and its position.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the fracture is at the head only, then set it as straight as possible, so that it is in natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or slopes towards the jaw, then raise the patient on his stomach as much as possible for the reduction of this fracture to be successful.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	When you have placed it evenly, then place the ruler on it, and then place a piece of flax or twine, and tighten the knot, if it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and use the shoulder blade as much as the color is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And order the patient to sleep either on their back or on their side.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if abscess forms, and comes, if it does not hurt, then as long as the abscess does not hurt, and place what we have already said.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to restoration, and tighten if it is necessary, if there are no other accidents.
et c’est li maniere.	And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	The first sentence to translate is "de la brisure de l’ajutoire". The translation of this phrase
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The assistant is that which is between the shoulder bone and the shoulder blade of the arm, and if it is broken, then it should be repaired according to one of the following two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The other method is to use a piece of clean cloth, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two ends together, and pull them up, and place the blade under the stitch.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then place the sleeve over the broken arm, until it reaches the wrist, and make a loop with the sleeve, then it can hold any heavy thing or extend the sleeve around it.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then put the forceps evenly in your hands, as long as the forceps return to its place as intended.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	If the patient is unable to hold the dislocated head in place, the surgeon should lift the patient's arm and place their hand on the patient's collarbone. The surgeon should then instruct the patient to touch the mark made by the surgeon's hand at their own fingers, and also touch other marks on different parts of the body. The patient should extend each limb to its full length.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then break the lock and extend each of the parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the forceps are tilted towards the shoulder blade, then you should tie one end of the string to the shoulder blade and the other end to the opposite side, so that the forceps do not slip.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the forceps are tilted towards the elbow, then you should lightly tie one end of the string to the elbow and the other end to the opposite side, so that the forceps do not slip, while ensuring that the forceps are even with the shoulder blade and the elbow.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then place the forceps evenly as intended, and tighten it, hold your breath so that nothing happens.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if the abscess is pricked, if it does not stop within seven days, and you put on it fine sand and rose oil, as long as the abscess is pricked, it will be eased.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then extract it, and the manner of extracting it if you put the splint on the wound, then assemble the arm with the aid, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And tie the bandage, and extract it with the aid, and from the arm, if the arm is in the elbow, nothing will stop you, or if the shoulder is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use these, and place the cut with a wider and stronger needle than the others, and have between each cut one space of two spaces, and each space should be as large as it passes the break three times of each part.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then tighten the needles, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	If you see the setting of the needles and the stretching, as we have said, in the place where you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the healing, if it is left to itself for nine days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at each third day the link, that itch does not swell or it does not come to the limb because the gouty arthritis is too inflamed.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents come, then only slip if after three days or more, and lie on the patient's back, and have his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put the helper I cussin plain linen, and look every hour during or after the nourishment, that the limb broken does not move or is not softened the joints.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If the remedy is by the power of medicine, and we then cut into the meat that we have before us, in such a way that the meat is divided into equal parts.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when it comes to taking back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary that the helper and the leg are returned in XL years, all at once.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And therefore, it must be desired and administered to the patient with warm baths and ointments for the limb to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the tightening is thin and entangled, it should be slowly and gradually loosened for 1 to 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "funicle," and some are smaller, and it is these that form the pouch.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is dislocated, towards the small joint.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance only the large bone is broken, or the small one, and by chance they are assembled together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, the repairs are lighter, and the cures;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large bones are broken, it is a poor cure, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bones are broken, it will be sufficient to stretch lightly and put them even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large bone, then the treatment must be strained more forcefully.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and it is extended over the inner side of the hand, and the palm of the hand is raised higher than the others, and the small bones are placed lower than the others, and the patient should be supported by the physician himself, and the thumb should be raised higher than the others, so that the patient suffers no pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the shoulder muscles of the arm to the opposite side, either towards the thumb or towards the elbow, and some other muscles in the opposite direction.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the head in place, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is in pieces, then he puts each piece in its place, and if there are no deviations that point to the cause, and you cannot restore it in its place, then follow our advice and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the force of the wound, I have spoken to the single physician;
si pren la cure.	if they take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear, and they are treated with ointments made of rose oil and wax, which are neither too hard nor too soft, nor too greasy;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and they are applied gently, until the abscesses are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then the bone, and he puts the powder of the fine mill with a lot of urine, then the seeds, and it is the seed of the brisket that is more forward, and a little wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and he says that it must have VI branches or arms in different positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether it is in one of the bones, or in II:
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and it is drawn up more above the brisket than other parts, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter:
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and be the belts that are above the wet and moist brisket, and not be too hard or rough:
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the child, whose parents are absent, of the lineage, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some years.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any one happens to have an accident come to the member, if prickling comes to the member, if you should cool the member with warm water as much as possible, until the prickling is calmed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member rest without moving.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then the stripping resumes, and if the limb is softened and the bones are loosened, and it seems like something, then it will be loosened.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the nails come to the member, because it is too tight, then you must soften it in a short time, and let some years pass, until the nails grow, and then strip it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if these things do not come to the patient when we have said them, within twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or if the patient is in pain, then he can put his hands on his chest, and his chest should be even, and with little movement and relaxation, he falls asleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And it is restored in XXX years or XXXV, and by chance in XX years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It is hoped that on the back of the hand and at both wrists there are few fractures, and only sprains many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient manages to hold it steady, and holds it firmly in front of them,
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then they extend their hand over the extended toe, and extend the broken bones, and place them evenly in the joints, as long as they are well connected.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and bandages, if necessary, then put on a splint according to the size of the limb.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and is wrapped in one fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the heel of the foot, then make a ball of bandages, and instruct the patient to pull the bandage over the broken heel.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then the strain of a long, flaccid member, and it is the size of the hand, and it is strained, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the bone, then it comes that you place a splint on it, and another one on the foot, if the hand is over and right, then the line goes through the hand, and it is tightened between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to none of us on both sides, and they are locked, then it should be placed evenly, as it should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And it is strained with the palm, and if you see that a straight small nail is placed to lift the fracture, and does not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is in others, and as in the index or one of the others, if it is placed evenly, and it is held with the healthy finger that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	If you tie them all together with what you have, or if you put them on a sling, as much as you can.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and positioning of the dislocation, and cut what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bones of the elbow are often broken many times, and it is clear when it turns in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the restoration if it is tied with the lines of the fracture, and the other is not.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their face, then extend each member of its ligament to its equal part.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And it happens when the fracture is set in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the joint, then some of the bones are pulled in one direction and the others in another, causing the break to be uneven.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it comes to the joint of the knee, then loosen the ligaments of the knee and extend the leg.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the bone even with your two hands, according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and the bandage, and if it does not move, it is correct.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if it moves slightly, then let it rest and return to your work and your care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in parts.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap it around the fracture, doubling it in two or three layers, and removing the excess, then bend the leg until the heel comes to the root of the nail, and put one long thread between the kneecap and the leg, loosening the knee joint, and the end of the thread goes to the ankle;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the leg and the knee of the bend, then put the splint on, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use the fifth finger between the leg and the knee of the cloth to evenly stretch the strap, then start to tie the form III or IV on the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as you go further on the splint, less is tied.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take the two strings that you have tied between the leg and the knee, and the third splint that is attached, then go back to the other end of the file at the head of the string, as long as you can see the piebald.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	When the limb is strained, if it does not move from its joint, then it is left alone, and there is no signs of inflammation or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it comes, if it does not return, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if it has pieces of the bone that pricks, then it can be treated; and it can be.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if it cannot be treated, then it is necessary to cut the limb, and drain it.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as we have said, whether it is healthy or not.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never has the joint been broken in, if it is not put in its place, as we have said in the shoulder and arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	He advises that the elbow is restored in L years, or less than less, according to the differences of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the right knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the right knee joint there is little fracture, but it wheezes many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, if not but a bruise, or a puncture, and comes to all wounds, and feels pain, and that is well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is placed if one makes equal those that are lost to their other side, as long as they are assembled in their place.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then place the template, and insert a rounded staple, if you are skilled at it, and tighten it as it should be, then reward all the adjustments we have mentioned in other fractures, such as dislocation and other similar cases.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you place at each accident what it should be, as long as it is safe.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	That in the leg there are two bones, because some are called by right not "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	When a fracture occurs at the elbow, and it is treated in the same way as a properly set arm, and all the parts are restored. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg of all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bones are broken, and it feels great pain, and one can see well.
et torne desoz.	then turn around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	After the extension, put it in place, and hold it evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But if it is not, it is necessary that the fracture be straight, and if there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the other according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	When you have completed your work, if you take two pieces of braided hair that point in opposite directions and are long enough to reach from the thigh to the knee, then...
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap them around the leg from the thigh to the knee, and tie it off there, and at this point do not allow the leg to lean to the right or left, and it will be well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one maintains the length of the hair on the leg, and it is made of wool, and it is placed on the leg to prevent movement, and this is done properly in the break or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each leg to see if it has an abscess or any other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the cure is done when it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of the bones of the hand
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is never a fracture, but the bones of the hand come to no fracture and must be careful, and only twisted in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there are many bones broken, and you see them breaking over each other, then set them as straight as possible, as if they were on the ground, just like when they were flying, and then place your foot on the leg, and lift the bones as much as they can stand in their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then apply the bandage and stitch, and then make a small tableau at the bottom of the limb, then draw it up to the knee, then when you have wrapped it around, then wrap drapes around the rest of the body, and other things that you know how to do;
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is not straightened, you will find the bones uneven, broken, dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	If there are no broken bones, if they are repaired, then as we have said, it should be done with the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then, place the other bone in the stele according to the length of the other, and make a larger pocket, then put the point that I mentioned in, and stretch it accordingly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or more broken bones, if you place one on each with a stele according to its quantity, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and stretch the point, it will be fine.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if it is placed on the top of the point with the stomach of the point, then it will be well etched.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	It is necessary that you do not neglect the other things I have said for other breaks, as we have said.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And cut out every accident as it comes.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	The following sentence should be translated into English: "of the fracture of the bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the woman's nature is broken, if it is made larger, then it leans towards the painful side, and should be held by the side.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the knee of the patient's nature with wool, and put as much as I have.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then lay the woman down, and gently raise her shoulders, and then jump the wool, as it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the knee with the cloth.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	When she sees the wound, if it is bone, and when she has cleaned it, she puts on the dressing, and in seven days or more, it will heal.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the fracture is healed, and if you see it, take a bowl of bloodroot, and attach a cord to the wound, and pour all the blood into the bowl in nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the cord until the bowl is full of blood.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	Nature will heal the fracture.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it will be filled with cotton, and left alone for no more than seven days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the arm is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the elbow.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And these breaks are not well known to those who study and use it, and they do not read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break means in more ways the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand the doubts.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the jaw, when it is broken, take an owl's gape and bite the jaw;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for three days or until it is healthy again.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the arm or shoulder, or seeming, that he be healthy now, if that the wounds we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if the vitrolle burns, if you have nothing else, then resume restoring the fracture at the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the patient does not come the next day, leave the restoration until the following day, as long as the patient is calmed, and do not touch him again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause the patient to come with evil accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is broken, it should be set in place as soon as possible, if you can manage to do so gently with your hands, at a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extensions are not apparent to put them evenly on your hands, if the rammer has this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because it is necessary to press three or four times, according to how many there are in each treatment of the splint.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be sharp and of medium size, so that it does not tear at the compression on your limb, and it should also be ahead, and large in front, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And is called the "palisade", because it should have the heads of the screws placed on the end of the bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And the bone once again, as much as it rises, and make them equal on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight, and the fragments cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you cover the head of the bone with the bandage, as much as the fragments have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, if it manages to pass through an appropriate instrument, either a cautery or an incision or a more suitable one, for your own good.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then use this which is made of sharpness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, seek help immediately, as it may not be in its natural state.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you make it so that it is in its place, then wrap it with a strip of black, warm ointment, and properly so.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything else on the wound, such as oil, so that it does not come to be sore and corrupt.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer the ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it with a cloth entirely, according to the size of the wound, and make sure the wound is not tightened with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times it has caused the patient's leg to be paralyzed, and they have brought in the physician or died or were corroded never.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And the scars are softer and more supple than the others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is large or great, and you doubt that you have had accidents but did not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the leg, if it does not happen that you put ointments on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But envelops around, on the side of the elbow, hard wrappings, and they tie.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, and if all that you have placed on it has come out, and you put on a salve to heal wounds, which is a common and similar ointment.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary that you unbandage the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is not swollen and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the member be straightened in a partly manner that the belly can be moved lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they continue to twist, and it cannot be held together but moves away from the belly, with small pieces of bones, because it is necessary that you close the wound with a tent, and all these broken parts cause that this pain comes.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the shoulder, or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is written in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and it is opened at the joint, as with the bone of the elbow or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if it is not treated, because many times death comes, but it is left open until it bleeds;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance a wound may be found on it after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it;
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of thorns that come out during the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of the fracture, we come when it is near to the joint, and it is a matter to see the appearance of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And by chance, it cannot make the limbs its natural position.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	If we find that it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If it is treated with styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcolla, acacia, and similar ones, if you do not use any of these, or all together, and mix them with spikenard or with a large amount of beer or with asafetida;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and apply them to the wound, and extract it well, and do not let it drip in your hands;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then let it drip, and continue with another one until the swelling is reduced;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	If you strain too hard on a well-made piece of cloth.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	For if the fabric does not hold up, it will tear all the threads from the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the blister is converted into hardness as a piercing, and it becomes sore to the touch, if the covering is removed, and the excess is revealed;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Or you do not shave it as soon as it is healed, until it is healthy, and the care as soon as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb that is weak after a cast
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone fracture is restored, and the swelling disappears after weak and subtle limbs, if it comes from various causes.
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	If one of the bones is because it was cut too tightly, and it did not fit as expected.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because there were too many stitches, and the nerves could not come to the member.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or due to the multitude of stitching.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or because there were too many large movements, and it did not fit at its time.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or because there is little blood in the body, which makes them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And if the treatment is that you make the patient lie down, and make the chest tense as much as possible without multiplying in it.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths, and then he becomes joyful and calm.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then apply poultice to the member, if it attracts the great swelling, and the redness often comes from the red tede, until the swelling reaches the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A dislocated limb after injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limbs are twisted after resetting, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the affected member is deformed, it does not fit its natural shape.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if one does not believe the folk who say that one must break the member completely at once, and most have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these operations are blamed, and great harm comes of it, and often death occurs.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	The first line of the text translates to: "All wounds, if they are nodulations and tortures, are fresh, if they are raised with hot water, or herbs that soften, if like soles of feet, and roots, and honey-locust trees, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	The second line of the text translates to: "And I apply a mollifying substance if it is well made, as dysentery is, and take the sole of the foot, and cook with fat or linseed oil, and apply on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	The third line of the text translates to: "Or you take fat figs, and crush them with colon fat, and similar medicines that moisten the dysentery.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is there where the noose is tightened continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow movement to the limb at each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	When the tortuosity is aroused and becomes painful, like a piercing, and there is a need for the ointment at the forge, if it comes to touch the bone, under the subtle incision lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put on linen and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs at no joint, if it comes now to return sensation to the limb.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if we are delayed, if it becomes swollen, and by chance if it is reset at the shoulder.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it does not matter how we move it at the ear when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Many times brought to vomit and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Indeed, when this happens, if I make the patient well, then let it go, as long as the abscess is not healed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then, the patient's inflamed and oily limb was raised, then gently reset, and each member was treated as if the treatment came from their own legs.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the cauteries for the dislocations of the shoulder bones.
des mandibules	for the dislocations of the mandibles.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Recently, it has been found that the mandibles are often dislocated, and there are two ways to reset them:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	either they are a small piece of their bones, and are softened slightly;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated and hang downwards, and cut the saliva from the mouth that cannot be held, and cannot close the mouth, and wrap the tongue with speech;
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it returns through the more common positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is completely achieved and accomplished, then you must gently reset it, and do not touch it.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a way that the minister burns the child's head of the patient, and pierces the tip of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which causes the mouth to close, if it is dislocated by II parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And the other two hands are deformed to make them equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to smooth out his mandibles and move them all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the patient should be held steady until it is in its proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is reset, it should be greased, just like the two mandibles together, with hot oil and ointment, until it is reset lightly.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	There is no need to translate this line as it seems to be a command or instruction rather than a medical term. It could be translated as "Do not try to bring it back, as we have said." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	When the hairs are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth feels relaxed, if you put soft flannels moistened with oil of roses and wax on it, then gently bind the hair with threads or strings.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	When the patient falls asleep on his back, and his head is between two pillows, if he does not move to the right or left, and does not strain himself, but prays with light food, as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Then he swallows what he sees lightly, and does not strain himself to open his mouth for eating and drinking, as long as the jaw is well steadied and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set at once in an hour and are not converted to their proper positions, then if fevers and customary coldness come on, and by chance stomach pain and vomiting of clear bile arrive.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, you will know that it is a disaster.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And many times he died, in nine years.
de la forcelle	from the force.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be removed from the cost of continuing the arm and the hip, and it is never fixed at the deflation, and it is felt as such.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And if the patient has a dislocation, it is when the shoulder pains on its side, and extends its arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	Then press the shoulder with your hand, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then place the cautery and the burn on the skin, and pull it off.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the head that is towards the chest cannot be dislocated.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If it does not happen, and if it does not dislocate ever, then reset the shoulder at its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then place the cautery and the burn on the skin, and pull it off, and instruct the patient to rest as long as they are healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And then, bring the shoulder head back to its place when it is out of its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	There are three ways in which the shoulder is dislocated:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	If one part of the shoulder is dislocated, it is due to the muscle being pulled away from the bone.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second way is in the muscle area that is closest to the bone.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And by chance, it can also be dislocated at the other end, but this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And it does not get dislocated from the shoulder muscle or nerve.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And more often than not, it gets dislocated towards the shoulder blade, especially for those who have poor posture, because they jump higher.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough fat, they jump and prick themselves with points, and then return to their points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they are struck or crushed, and the muscle of their spine is torn out by an abscess, and ensure that it is not dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is therefore necessary that you stretch it, as long as you are sure of it.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when they are pulled towards the shoulder, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and from there to the shoulder, as it is in some cases, and so it is with others.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and cannot bring his hand to his face, and does not move at all.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden because you can see the scar.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new, or if the child is young.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is to gently hold the hand of the young patient high, then place your fingers on the knee, and gently pull up on the joint.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And he gently holds the hand, extends it upwards, and places it aside.
si venra hastanment.	If a sudden cold comes.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands just afterward, then the patient should be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the patient should be given a warm, soothing and softening remedy, such as a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in hot water, and it should be given.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be relieved of the pain on his back, and put a wet bandage on the ankle, not too soft or too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the bandage, and gently lift the shoulder of the upper arm, and move the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and some other signs indicate that the patient's shoulder is dislocating, if it does not move freely.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder is back now, and if you see that the dislocation is reset in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is that you make sure to present the home that is greater than the shoulder;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that the breast is turned towards the chest, and the shoulder is pulled away from the body of the patient, and the body is lifted up, so that the shoulder hangs freely;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and some other signs indicate that the patient's hand is being turned towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too heavy, then with them there is nothing heavy that can be done, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And the resetting is done in another way as well:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is made by measuring a long thread on the ground, and the head of the shoulder is also reset as if it were a pin, and it should not be too thick or too rough.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then it is placed on the patient's shoulder, but if it has been twisted too much, and the shoulder is too long or too thick, it should be adjusted accordingly.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is extended on the other hand, and the joint returns to its proper place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	If it does not return to its proper place after these things we have said, then this treatment is not effective.
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	1. Take a strip of two arms of great and four of wide size, which can enter the joint through the front of the bone, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	2. Then wrap the strip around the head of the bone, making sure it is not too tight, so as not to harm the patient, and then place it on the affected joint;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	3. Extend the arm on the long side of the bone, and place the assistant on the head of the arm, and the other arm at the wrist, then extend the hands and leave the chest hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint now reveals itself.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	If the joint is realigned in this manner, if it comes to pass that you place a ball of thread equal to the size of the arm on one side, then place a powdered spice spray on the other side, with incense and vinegar, all along the shoulder blade and down the back, then tighten the thread on one side, turn the limb over the spray, and wrap the hand around the arm, and let the hand remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he be treated quickly, as the member will recover faster if it is comfortable.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then treat again after 4 or 7 days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is tight and not softened, it will be cured.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stiff due to moisture that came, or for another reason, it comes that you apply cauterizations at III incisions, as it is placed before or in the chapter of cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do everything correctly, and after 7 days it does not hold, and the joint does not rise with the arm raised forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And suspects that the joint will never return to its place in its socket.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the ankles, or knees, if it is made by force, and extension of hands, and it is treated at another time.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the cure comes pain in the member, and then with movement, if it is used with hot water many times, until that pain is alleviated, and return to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dear dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Shoulder joints that are stiff and dislocate again and again.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it has become loose in all directions, and even forward and backward, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it can be seen and felt well.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it becomes loose according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sharp edge with the clean part, if you see it open widely.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is fine, and cannot brush the arm, nor reach the shoulder with anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary to reset it always when the arrowhead comes out, because if the arrowhead comes out, it would be painful to pull it back.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance it cannot be brought back intact at all, in fact when it is below;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	If it is worse than the others, and it is more painful, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration if it is, when it is so that you can bring it back, extend your hand to your two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the arms are expanded, and the hands are moved according to the cost, down and up, and bend the joint at its assembly or at the root of the palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forward, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, then apply strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And when two ministers extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move at extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm in each direction, then have a long and wide double cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you look at the joint of the joint in your hand, if there is no oil to smooth the joint, then form the joint as it regenerates.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in the joint, if you put it with a dry cloth with ointment, and form the joint, and can hold the arm at the wrist of the surgeon, and leave some fingers, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is tight in its place, if it is loose, and leaves it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, if you resume the application and the linen, and leave it for some time, until it is firmly fixed.
puis le deslie.	Then let it be.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it is still, if it is bathed and rubbed gently, and pressed as much as it is calmed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or if you put on the joint a layer of fat sheep's wool, then leave it for an hour and a night, then the bone, and let the linen enter a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it hurts, he should rub the joint firmly, then put the nail back on, and then apply a poultice.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And repeat this two or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see, if he puts on a wet wool cloth and warms it with a poker, and stretches it out.
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it goes back to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de fe
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand becomes loose, and the return is lighter than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Indeed, it is necessary to return the hand to its place as soon as possible, while it is loose, unless the wound is swollen or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	When you want to place the forced hand on a table, extend the fingers, and then put your thumb in place, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pull it as it reforms.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Indeed, it is necessary to watch if it is well with him.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the forced hand on the table at extension and at the end.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the maimed hand on the table with your hand, and measure if you can put your hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the strain of the plaster does not appease the pain, and it leaves in this sense to resume.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put the dislocated joint back in its place after some time, then the joint will become permanently dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And the patient does not know that as long as the hand is inflamed, and cannot hold anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Therefore, the nerves are cut, or the artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other option than to hold by fire cauterization, and by chance there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are on the wound, if you apply the instrument we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for some time, then remove it and leave it alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well, and there is no pain, if the hot iron, and the rubbing as much as it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never has the hand of the patient been loosened at any part, never at the back of the palm or abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, first reset the dislocation by holding the shoulder joint in place, and then move it back to its original position.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	Then leave it alone for a few days, and then set it again in the same way.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And if you follow our advice, the shoulder will heal in a few days, and the joint will move freely, and then reconnect it.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often until it is healed, and if it dislocates again, and if it moves in the palm of your hand, and do as you have done before until it is healthy.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And so I do, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The first sentence to translate is "dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos". The translation of this line is
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder of the man is dislocated, or the woman's elbow is dislocated, if there are more dislocations, it is because there has been no treatment, for the patient dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the sign is that the dislocation is forced to jump and cannot hold it, and many times all the members are softened, or the knees or the right arm or the left.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times it stops at four parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which stops at the buttocks is called "glibosis".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment if it is that you reward if the glibosis has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no treatment or cure, but total sanation.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from choking or drilling or similar things, the ancient ways of cures by great words, or it has no small profit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I shortened it according to my intention, and formed stitches in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gallbladder disease that comes before, no one is healthy or well.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also those that come directly in the second ribs, and cannot be cured except for the one that comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient's shoulder is extended over his face in the first elbow and has some strain on him, which does not cause him to bend.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then the bandage is made at the head of the neck, and the other is for the shoulder, and a line is tied around the shoulders of the patient, and the other is for the elbows, and the wrists, and the fingers.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers stretch the limbs, one at the head and the others at the toes, among the two tenses.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the tense as we have said, and the doctor places his hands on the spikes, as it revolves.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not revolve with this cure, then take a third arm of long wood, and carve out the hole, and the patient must be on the side, and cut the head of the tableau out of the hole, then put the mold of the tableau on the spike.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the doctor's hands on the other head of the tableau, and press well, as it revolves in the joint.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If you see, if I do it at the turn that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And if you tie knots in the head of the helper's arm, and turn each knot to the other, and there should be a thumb's space between each knot, longwise.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And if there is a puncture in each knot, or the turn moves, and the knots are tightly held in the earth, so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each knot, if there is a turn turning, and if the turns are loose, and there should be two turns for every petit knot, to turn the turn.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then, tie the first ligament that is among the ties of the torso towards the head, and the other ligament towards the other torso, and each of the ministers sets their torso on all the ligament, and the masters place the awl equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	When it is even, if you apply a desiccant with much urine, then cleanse, and then remove the stool, and then apply a tablet of III doses, which preserves the leukocytes and the healthy part of the spinal cord, then tie the ligament as we have said, using the needles of subtle norrisment, as long as it is healthy.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes to the end of health, if it is necessary to administer smoothing and dissolving medicines with the stethoscope that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never has a piece of plaster been applied, and never has there been an appearance at the back of the spine with a stiff neck, and make sure that this is not a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that has opened, because one should not have too much confidence in it.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance, death might come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Advice: The joints of the shoulder and the shoulder are only dislocations, and not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the elbow is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	by flesh and bone, and front and back.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more flesh, and less dislocation in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocation is that when the injured leg is joint with the sound one, it is longer and more open, and the injured knee has more space than the sound one, and it cannot double its knee in fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the one that is deflected by the abscess of the chest, because the head of the shoulder comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the burn, if this accident is against these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of that one who came in front, if it is well his leg according to the completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	1. All ways, do not double the gentle sensation of pain, and if you see it happening, hold your urine, wipe your anus, and when you go, pass through the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him who comes to the rear is if he cannot expand his genital area, and does not double, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is dislocated against the costal cartilages.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	2. If the appearance of this dislocation is due to previous dislocations and it does not improve according to its position, if there is no treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	3. then it is only presumption that he has assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	4. And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, it will be bent and deformed, and the muscle will be stronger on the left and right sides;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	By chance, if it returns, and there is no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply strong support and tighten the leg with two hands or with the limb that is closest to the groin.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and some other supports extend your hand in a similar way that it blocks your hands from being loose, then it tightens around the limb that is closest to the groin.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And some others tie the head of the limb with the limb.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend it up and down once, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and hangs down.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common, as seen in four appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to provide care for its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If the dislocation is at the jaw, then it is necessary to tie the bandage on the healthy side of the jaw, then place the knot at the root of the tongue, and the other end around the tongue that is turned outwards, then bring the knot towards the tongue and towards the forceps.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then perform some other operations on your arms, and apply a bandage to the largest muscle of the dislocated jaw, and extend it along the formed edge.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	If it returns to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	If you do not hold the shoulder in this manner as we have said, then it comes to pass that the patient's foot is drawn together by a strong ligament at the two ankles and at the two knees, and the affected leg is extended twice as much as the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then it is hung suspended from the head of a nail, and it is held down by the two arms.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then order the minister to bind the head of the girdle, and have other ministers suspended with the patient, who bind the girdle, because the joint now returns to its original position.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at its worst, if the patient feels pain, as we have said in the one who has difficulty, and straightens the limbs of the affected limb properly, and also the knee.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two threads, one at the head and one at the other end, then secure the thread between the thighs of the affected limb in the proper form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and it has a plant of wet drapes to prevent it from drying out, so that the affected limb does not bleed, then extend each minister towards him, and he places the dislocation in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it there, and press as we have said in the gilbositeit, and guide the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the affected limb quickly, and according to what I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And put your pain on the other side of the malefactor's hand, then press with the other hand, and stretch it towards the genital area.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the groin, and it cannot be stretched out by the malefactor, then do not lift him up, but if he was dislocated in the groin like this before, as we have said about the two hams, then...
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it should be on his face, and the stretch should be extended as we have said before, and he must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be enough when the malefactor stretches his legs, and they will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then reset the dislocation, and place the splint, and hold it with a bandage so that the pain does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And rest for three days or four, then remove the splint, and place the plaster.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	If you see that they are equal, if it is tight, then leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then remove the splint, and let the element go as soon as the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the shoulder's dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	It is known as trenching and deferring, and delaying.
et ne desalue point devant.	And do not move forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not stay at the knee, it means it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient lie on their side, and extend the leg if possible, and put your buttocks on theirs, and put your feet on theirs.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take their knee with your hands, and move between your two, then bend the two knees that form it.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And other assistants extend the foot, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it is well dislocated lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster above, and make the leg straight at the knee, and assemble the toes as much as three or four times, then cut it off.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not work on the joint of the elbow, until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not present, then extend the treatment firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the wound, as long as it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is never twisted, and never completely dislocated, and it is difficult to mend.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And if the knee is swollen, and try before the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	If the limb is light, and it should be stretched gently with your hands only when it is weak.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And if it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the limb with one hand, and tighten the knee with the other.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw the point on your right hand, and then on your left, twice, then pull it up, and hold it well at the top.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this twice, as we have said, by bending and drawing the point.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, then the work is repeated because it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return, then I will make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly press his heels against the ground between his toes, and spread his legs wide so that the point does not pierce the skin.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then, the minister traces the cup with their hand, and some other ministers extend their hands or arms to the collar of the shoulder.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then, all ministers extend their hands equally, and the pins are placed either inside or outside the joint of the patient to hold the patient in place while they are extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then, the minister places the dislocation in their hands, and some other ministers trace the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation returns to its original position.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is firm, if the plaster is applied and the stitches are removed, and the joint is formed, and the tendons that were under the ankle are tightened, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then it is left alone for 2 or 3 days, and if it becomes loose, it should be tightened.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then it is tightened after the third or fourth day, and the patient should use the aid for 4 days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if the patient advances as far as the end, it is only a matter of time before it dislocates again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if an abscess forms, it comes, and if you can calm it down, as we have said elsewhere, as soon as it is healthy.
des dois	The first line of the text is
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they can be extended well with effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation occurs in no part of the shoulder, it is only a matter of time before it dislocates again. Then, place the aid on the shoulder at the same level as the joint or above it, and press on the parts that open these joints, until it realigns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	When the hair is long and even, and it does not prick, if one makes a cut in the flesh at the base of the hair, then the wound forms and is left for three days, then it heals.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and it rests, as long as it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and slow, do not be hardhearted.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And begin with calming remedies for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you see no hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb at the joint, even if the abscess is still present.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is at the joint, if you can calm the abscess and treat the wound, according to what is necessary, use drying herbs.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture, and the bones are broken, then the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And keep away from the path of despair, according to what I have said, for it is good for you according to your creator, and by the wisdom of your arm and your heart.
