O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fulfillment of it, and made the end through its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I came to my mind that I have fulfilled this with the cautery, which is from hands' work, it is known as "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is troubled in our region and is neglected in every way, if it is perished by science and knowledge, and there is nothing left but the small descriptions in books written by the ancients that the hands have seen.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this has led to the error and ignorance, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	I seem to think that I could revive this assembly of the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come together the forms of the fire-cauterizing instruments and other tools of the work with the assistance of the declaration and preparation of the patient, as it is their craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who enters the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and teeth, and the number of joints, and the movement and resting of the limbs, and the fruit of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Ypocrates says that the non-drugs are not enough, and with the work they are few.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that those who are not acquainted with things before said, if they attempt it, they may err and harm men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	I have wanted many times to write about these who become involved in this science and if they abandon this science and sense experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	I see a man who cuts off the penis of a woman, and cuts the veins of her leg.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	and so much blood comes out that the woman dies in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I see another man who operates on a hernia of an old man, and the hernia was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	if he takes with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have already been called upon to treat this wound, and I see the position of the helper and the size of the wound, and if it was not cut well, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I see another man who treated the duke of our land who had a broken leg and with the fracture caused pain.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the patient's ignorance tightens the wound on the wound as it is seen in short time, and does not leave the wound any pain, and leaves it at the end of the term.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he orders that it should not slip away.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and waited until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot, and it came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and cut off the leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I cut it away, if it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the ways of corruption were already confirmed or member, and could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption spreads throughout the member as long as the limb is completely destroyed.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another mirror that will fall and be enchanted, and then inflamed by the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is free of melancholic humor, only then does it happen that if it is not in part the limb can be completely healed what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	It is to know, how or it has risk in other arrangements.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore, it is important that you keep yourself informed, so that the foolish do not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your weapons in hand, and lightly but firmly use your hands, and use the best way if for the grace of God you come to salvation and be wise.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the distressing diseases of grief be cured.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and doubt your weapons of this that you do fear, and be sure in yourself so that you can come from this world to another for glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen's words are not understood in any of his instructions.
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not trust in the care of a sick person, lest you be called a foolish man.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have found this treatment in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and it is the ordered chapter for the head until the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of stitches, and of the sutures of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and sawing, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it orders the chapters and the forms of the stitches.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it orders the use of different tools and the forms of stitches.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, if we remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and no harm to any complexity.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of aid, and indeed, is the longest word and the most subtle science and the secret remedy.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and they spoke of more things than the arrows, and they agreed to this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	The patient's hair is instructed to be let grow long and even for the fire cautery treatment. If pricked at the base, the eyes must be held steady to prevent movement until growth occurs.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire cautery helps in curing all complexions, regardless of their nature or type.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	It is known that fire cautery can cure hot complexions with moisture and dry complexions with dryness.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry complexions, there is no other remedy or treatment than fire cautery, as it is the greatest help.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And they say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That fire cautery is only effective for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of hot fire is that it is very hot, and it should not be cured by hot disease through chilling or by any other means.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And that which says the opposite that cauterization gives great aid to hot disease and dryness that comes in the course of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the heart of the patient and its moisture on the complexion, you know the heart is burning.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I concur with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it before by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And all ways, no one should interfere with this more than he who has experienced it and knows by long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the spasms of tens.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no knowledge, just as in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they were found to resemble and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization is similar to fire if it is a secret of the arts, and above all, it is an ardent medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it only causes harm to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The heating medicines come from one part of the body to another by moving, and they bring about the relief of symptoms of sorrow to health.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	by chance, the patient meets.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The doctor has high hopes and the goodness of his substance does not do much, if it is not deficient.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I found this by experiment and by the length of service and study I have given to the art, and it has proven true.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And I apologize for the length of the speech, because it pleases me only to show you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says when demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Understand, son, that the cauters should be made in such a way that they are appropriate, and they should be pried.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	I say that cauterization is useful in all cases, because the pain is relieved by the aid of cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is used for necessary pain and hastens that cannot wait for the time when the greatest harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think otherwise, foolish man, if they do it as the physician does.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For in the disease that is cured by cauterization, there is no return.
et il le dient ensi;	And he says therefore:
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so if they are careful, because cauterization is only a means of burning that dries the complexion, and drying the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines for hastening one's valor, and for the virtue of one's work and signory.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And there is something that the disease grows once according to the complexity of the patient's condition and the strength of the disease and its virtue.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the excess is assembled in him by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not cauterized, then administered to the patient or he has little excess and moisture, like cauterization of teeth for pain, and similar things, and part of the pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	But few people understand that cauterization is called the end of medicine, and it's true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	The patient only believes that cauterization is useless after medicine, but they understand it is false, and it is a cauterization of medicine because when we administer remedies for any disease and they do not work, we then use cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	2. Therefore, it is well that cauterization is called surgery, but not according to the attention of fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauterization with instruments of gold is as harmful as with iron, and they did not know that it was because of the quality of the gold and the high nature of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	They said that cauterization does not make any wound worse, but it is true to see that I have experienced it and found that it is seen in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Et cauteres d'or valent mieux que de fer, si com ils le disent.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And all voy you see the instrument of gold is heated, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if you heat it too much.
si font au feu;	If they make in the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And then it is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use fire cautery in our work, because it has been proven to be effective.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter of the little finger nails, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Olive oil cautery is used on moist and cold hands, and it is done for the disease called "soda," and for many humors that descend from the little finger as ears, and eyes, and numerous sleeplessness and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and semblances of disease.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cauterization if it is that the patient has been purged by solvent medicine changing the head, III nuis or IIII, according to which virtue and strength and accustomed habit of the patient he can bear.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then repeat the chief of the male patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and put your hands on their shoulders.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After, place the root of your palm tree between the roots of his two legs.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And if your two hands come together, bleed slightly, and clean the fire cautery called "olivare", which is shaped like this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the joint of the elbow, and pull and stretch your hand little by little, and twist.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then gently release your hand, and reward the elbow if you see the first bone a little small.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	If you do not see it, if the cauterization resumes as soon as you see the bone, like I have shown you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking a piece of silk and rolling it, and tying it around the wrist with soft cotton thread, and putting it on, and leaving it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After making the silk thread even and smooth.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it until the burn is cool.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacone", as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And tell him, the older the wound, the more it will bleed.
et por ce si aide mues.	For this reason, seek help immediately.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And no one of these says that you should stretch the cauterization so much that part of the bone is raw, and then remove what is raw of the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And one should continue to shave as much as possible, and press firmly until the bone is thin as the women do in their ears for the reason that the humors come out outside.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And one should continue to shave the overturned wound.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Afterwards, one must cure and soothe it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	These two methods of cauterization seem to be the best in general, because in no man is there fear or doubt.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And it seems to me that I should leave it alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	For the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to continuous solutions of nature, as we have experienced in other parts.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And similarly, when the head of the shoulder is weak due to nature, and the first appearance of the cautery is more salving and drying for me, and I use it accordingly, I assemble the salutation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	1. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	Throughout the entire head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, if it must use the drugs called "cochies" and pills, and purging of the head and oils and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if we make the cautery as we have mentioned before, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	The head of the patient's shoulder is severely dislocated, and it cannot be moved.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Therefore, the fire cautery should be applied to this area that we have previously mentioned.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After performing the fire cautery on each of the patient's corneas, as we have previously described, and then performing the fire cautery on the area called "vaselines,"…
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is these that are then covered with a ventouche.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and clean your hand if you do not see the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much greater pain in this fire cautery than in others, and I will speak to you about it further.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	et covrent que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c'est li forme:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When one part of the body suddenly hurts, and it spreads throughout the illness, and the head is purged with altered medicines, and the other cures mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, but none of them help.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	And I made the cauterization in two ways, that is, with medicinal ignition and with iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	If the cauterization is with medicinal ignition and you burn a dose of alum, it will scorch and rupture the skin, and then they make the temple where the pain holds in a certain way so that you can replenish the dose of alum on the wound.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	When it is corrected and held firmly, and left alone for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	And then the splint is removed and the wound is treated with honey, leaving it open for two to three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then, if necessary, put the leg in warm water until the swelling goes down.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the wound has healed and is healthy.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	If you see that this cure does not work or if you have any questions about the remedies I have written or other treatments for burns, please consult a qualified medical professional.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron burn is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron burner so that it has this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or has one hole for the ear, and appears to be small in size.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place the painful shoulder on your hand, hold your hand steady and gently pinch the skin a little, until the half of the distance is covered.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and hold your hand gently so that the artery does not burn, which is cold, and there is a abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After putting cotton on the thread, and place the shoulder for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I put moistened cotton on the wound and then treat the shoulder with ointment until it is healthy.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you return to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing tool called "cultellare" at any point, and do not cut the artery in this wound that is not yet closed.
de emigraine	of embolism
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you cure migraines, as we have said in dividing diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before says of medicine and hot iron does not help, therefore it comes that you walk the cauterization which is called "cultellare" as soon as it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and still wait until the shoulder does not have a line of half a dozen long, and hold your hand once, and the pressure that you do not compress the artery and do not come to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and cut off the lower jaw that moves when it is cut, and the nerves only have motionlessness and spasmus does not come to the patient, and cut off the artery when it is compressed, or compressed has great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the evacuation flow in its course.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	However, I will explain blood when the artery is closed, and I will show you where to find this in the book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the head as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery with the cauterization that has two loops.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this cauterization is better than the one we have said and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from too cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and it is heard of medicines in solution and other remedies that we have said in the division, and the pain does not stop, therefore wash this cauterization which is called "points", of which the form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After that, cut all around the unhappy ear, or around the two lobes if they cause pain at the base, and then pull out a little piece of the root of the ear since you have found the earlobe's end.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and cut on each side of each ear by X points.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after you have healed the ear as much as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torment that must be treated by cauterization is only those that move due to sweat, as we have said in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make cauterization as those that come from scratching and sweating of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is silent with fumes of ydrs and spurging of chief and gargle, and it does not work, then you must first cauterize the patient with three cauterizations.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One at the root of the ear, and one on the forehead, and the third in the jaw of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And place the cauterization in the part that is open healthy, and make the cauterization at the top of the ear where the tip of the ear is without the corneal part of the ear, and another in the temple as long as some punches.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leave the cauterization as long as it does not hurt too much.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the appearance of cauterization that we have shown before, but it is a little more delicate and it should be a little larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the shoulder as I have said before, until it is healthy;
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then I did four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	I sewed the two corners of the head, and I removed the head, and I also cut off the part called "gaskins" as we have shown before, and I cauterized it on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And treat as we have said before.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, the physician must give the patient large doses and modify the brain with pills.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After the physician has treated the patient's head, he puts on the occiput the plaster of snip, which is written or treated with ointments.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the way to cauterize:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is healthy enough, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not healthy enough, make three cauterizations on the head, descending from the forehead to the neck, and leave a space between each of the two large ones.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And the treatment is like the others, and if you see assistance, and the patient is suffering, then make a fire cautery in the environment.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the craftsmanship is, it is with the other two corners, and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And the cautery that is called "olive" is like I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	The first sentence to translate is "de la froidor dou chief". The translation is
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned with years and what we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After the surgeon has cleaned the head, then make a fire cautery on the head and at each corner, and the buttocks and III at the spine of the collarbone.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	If you have more skill in this area, and the heart is wet and the patient is sweating, and the disease is advanced, then make four burns with the spike on the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and leave it as long as the more painful it is, and gently hold your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure as long as it is healthy, and the burn that we called "olive" is located in front;
de l’epilempsie	The first line of the text is "de l'epilempsie".
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptic patients should only use cauterization when they are flemmatric, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is children who cannot bear it, then make a gargle and mastication, often with raw meat to modify the brain;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after you have removed the head from the environment, and I make a burn according to what we said before, and the burn on the face, and on each corner;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	When the patient suffers and is in distress, if they are paralyzed and have loss of sensation in the body, apply the cauterization as I have said to the one who has spinal and collarbone injuries, with the olive-shaped tool according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is awake, perform the fire cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy, the superfluities or corrupted and slippery moisture becomes large, therefore, as we have said for those with paralysis, perform the fire cautery on parts such as we have described.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy, the descending superfluity is melancholy itself, and the slippery moisture of the body, then it must drink something according to what the brain is capable of, as we have said in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the chief of the patient is loosened;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making a linen bandage well-made, as I have circled it, if I put it on the head of the patient;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient believes it is well-held, and it should be held tightly by all parts;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the ointment, and it is good to use old honey;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And when the heat of fire is applied, if one can bear it, then they should do it.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After emptying the circle with a needle, and leaving the head cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make this once a week for each patient with another government boiling, as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see that the cauterization is burned, by making more pricks all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cauterizing moistens the skull greatly.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then put soft cloth on a plier and grease with linen grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When hair comes first as signs that I have said in the division, then it begins and therefore drink and do this thing cleansing the head, and the warde of all moisture, and I make it soak more times in the morning.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After the patient has shaved his head, and the hair is cut, and the cauterization is made on the two temples, and the two ends are assembled, or if one end is shorter than the other.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cover all veins and arteries that are exposed and are long according to the size of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and guard against dislocation of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, if it is due to a part of your body being weak, like you have;
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery as you have done;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never do you cauterize or harm the two hips bones;
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed to be found in the veins, or seen in the arteries that are in appearance of the cheek's deformed;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And it is seen that these are cold, wet superfluities, therefore I made the fire cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the descent of the hairs:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the head, and you cauterize on the two temples, and you cauterize where the hair grows;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if it is more bearded, then the cauterization is sharper than the tip of the thorn in every small cautery;
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A great many tears flow from the eyes of the patient.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore it is better to drink a mixture of three maladies;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After he arrives at the physician, and I perform a cauterization or a thousand olive cauterizations.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and perform two cauterizations called "clavilis" above the two knees, a little off from the thighs.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and cover the artery that you do not close.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the ointment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, therefore it is cauterized with this cauterization called "olive oil":
de coi ci est li forme:	1. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see if I perform two cauterizations above the knees as the thighs are, and the calves are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave me your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	For the hair that does not have oil.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never has it happened that the hair of the olive oil is converted into wax, and pricks the oil, and then I make a cauterization according to two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This is about fire, or ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are grown and even, then set the patient free.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	Afterward, sew the paper of the hairs, such that it is as thin as the skin, and that it covers the beginnings of the signs of the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then apply fine cotton wool dampened with olive oil and musk, then scrape the fire cautery from the edge, then shape it as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After the fire cautery is applied to the part that has been pricked a few times, the wound should be cleaned.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	The signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised at the tip of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then gently press with your hand, and leave it for three days, then put soft cotton on the wound as long as the scab forms.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the ointment cure is complete and healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after that the hairs come out and the paper is softened, then continue the cauterization on the same part as you have done before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hair is burned, if the cauterization is done so that the paper is raised to its natural skin, and is even, and does not prick the hair at all.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The hot cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hair grow as long and even as possible, then make a piece of parchment the shape of the mirror's edge.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take some French soap and live chalk, of each one a .З., and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And grind it thoroughly, if it does not freeze, then scrape off the shape you made with the mirror's edge, and put it on the paper of the hairs.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the disease remains in one place only, if it must be removed, and it is not possible to remove it.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and then place a thin cotton cloth in the abscess's mouth.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the patient's head is in your hand and you show him the medicine, and press on the pores and the muscles every time the patient feels bitterness from the medicine, because he feels bitterness like from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have this done for a long time, if the medicine does not help you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bitterness has passed, if you lift the arm, and see if the paper is raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	If it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If it does not work, then apply more medicine to the joint or if the medicine has not been applied, as long as your joints are even and your eyes are steady, then proceed.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply soft cotton wool to the blister as much as the skin allows, after which clean the limb of the ointment called "dyafenis" and other ointments until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	If you have the skill to properly care for yourself, then you should take good care of your health with great diligence so that you do not lack in medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hair touches it in oil, then apply more medicine to the limb that has become soft from the paper properly, as you have done before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure when it is healthy;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and it is the shape of the humerus bone:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And since the size of the bones in men varies, and according to this, you should adjust your measurements:
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not reply with the wrong direction to the one that is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have described in divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not work, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand:
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and trace the patient's head between your hands in a way that it does not move or change position:
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after wipe with soft cloth around the eye or with persillon oil on the oil:
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heating the cauterizing tool that is divided into parts:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is bent at the head if it forms like a quill of feather, assemble the cautery so that it is the one bent.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, if it is pointed at the head and if you see, if it is like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but still, this one that is bent must be straight for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula it will be stretched, and in the dough, and it is dried.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, then the work, and it must be made into a mold.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After the fire cautery is applied, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where the oil is seeping out of the wound, so that your hands do not get burned.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not work, then reapply the cautery again, and if you have the chance, leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After that, apply moist cotton wool to the wound, and apply the desiccating ointment as soon as it is clean, and if after forty days it is not clean, then apply an acidic corrosive medicine as soon as the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And the traveler follows according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient ones knew.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand the fistula, and feel the leg.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After putting the needle in the fistula, the subtle change is that there is a form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make a quantity of one .З. of puncture;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firmly on the needle, and do not move the patient until the punctures are closed and the wound does not open, that the holes do not touch their oil.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the oil with cotton wool softened in the corner of the eye or in the ear.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the newborn, and bring the fistula back to the center of the umbilicus according to what is appropriate for the specific case.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips that are called "splits," and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks according to what we have described in divisions, and the patient does not benefit, then use a small cauterization tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And it should be carefully placed in those cracks as much as possible.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the shoulder, so that it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When abscess comes from the root of the gout or the vein, or the tooth, or the roots of the teeth, after making a purge and vomiting and it becomes watery and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Because it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the plug or stopper of the fistula, and hold your hand until the fire comes out of the mouth, and when it's done.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then make once or twice, after the cure we have said in the cures, until it is healthy.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if it is cured once or twice, it's good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, then you must expose the limb and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the knees are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it does not improve, then put the head of the malady in your care.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After shaving the cauterization, its form comes after in a similar way that you put a collar around the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And apply cauterization to the burn, and hold your hand tightly so that the patient feels the pain coming from the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After loosening your hand and continue cauterization according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the patient's mouth with salty water and rinsing it for an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is dried out and becomes hard.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain in the tooth comes from cold, whether it is cold or not, and the remedies of medicine are insufficient, then it has to be managed in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	And cauterize with salt and fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	If you can only find salt, then cauterize with it, and make the end as sharp as possible, either with a iron or a steel tip.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After that, take cotton and wrap it around the sharp end of a needle, and then make a hole in the burbled salt, and insert the tooth of the hammer as firmly as possible, and hold it until it cools down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And often until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and thread are burning, and put the iron handle on it as soon as the fire reaches the point of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The first sentence to translate is: "Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, if it forms like this, and then place it on the tooth and hold your hand until it is cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, as the pain will be relieved either immediately or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with hot butter in the pressure of this cautery, and then it will cool down.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery as big or small as you want, according to what you have.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the shape of the gauze:
des scrophules	The first sentence to translate is "des scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofulous boils are full and cold, and do not respond to medication for digestion, therefore, wash the fire cautery with soap after it comes out, and there will be openings for the smoke to exit from the other side.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the fire cautery on the wound once, or it will be difficult to remove, until it comes out of the font of the wound.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the wound is small, then put the fire cautery according to the size of the wound, and leave it for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on a soft cloth until the swelling subsides.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the shoulder of wounds and injuries as much as possible.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the collar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture reaches the joints and suddenly when cold becomes, then it is necessary that the patient be treated first with soluble medicines by the physician.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the other cauterization at the junction of the other joint of the spine, and it is the cauterization called "clavicle" as we have the form before.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the limb as we have described when it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the entire
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and disease of the joints are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is a chronic disease, then cauterize with the force you wish.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and I another cauterize between the two knees.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and the cauterization called "clavicle" according to the form previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, cauterize by pricking all the cauterization called "points" according to the form previously described in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the points be such as to cause pain up to thirty, or more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the wound according to what has been said above, and if it is a burn, then apply the cauterization of III rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are lighter, because you make 3 in one piece.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After which the patient is made to lie down on his back and side.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After gently touching the area, use your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the joint is dislocated, wash the fire cautery with water, and then this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	And cauterize the knee as far as it pains up to the chest, and then use four caustics together.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And this is done with the fire cautery that has three needles, because the form of cauterization is six caustics.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the third type of cauterization.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is adjusted this point because it has eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After, put the cauterization on the burn with silk.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After, make the patient rest, and do not let the limbs be long until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	When the dislocated head is reset, it is difficult to move, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Therefore, a cautery is performed on the large part of the cautery clavicle, or the tip of the cauterization when touched.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient's health is improved.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come to the stomach and it is pulled out of its complexion, and the purges are multiplied for him, and the customary cures are made, and he does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and his legs and hands are extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From this, I make three cauterizations on the thigh of the patient for the quantity of two doses, at all the cauterization clavicle, and two cauterizations on the costal bones as much as the cauterizations are at three angles, and it should be spaced between them so they are not joined together when they sweat;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And be the cauterization if it is necessary that they prick the two parts of the hair, and let the appearance of the cauterizations follow this form consistently:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large cauterization on the stomach following this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And the one who has fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and holding on to the stomach and according to the quantity you see, not following the amount you see.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then the cauterization is done on all the points called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we underwent, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	And the liver comes with pain of fretting and moisture and great fatty deposits, as it is made unnatural by its natural complexion due to superfluity.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	The patient should be treated according to what we have mentioned in sections, and if it does not profit him, then the shoulder may become inflamed due to its own friction.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	A sign of encephalitis is a burn according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, if it comes from the pituitary gland, or if the fluid of the brain comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And there should be space between each cauterization and the growth of a tooth.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And let the cauterization be long enough on the course, and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let the wound be as long as possible on one side, and let the shoulder be on its own bone.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	If it cannot be done, then do it hastily, and extend his legs, and loosen his bows.
et c’est li forme:	And it is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to do this, then cauterize these dou cutellaire cauteries, be subtle and gentle in the art, and take care not to burn all the skin, for you will dry out the entire body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And so that it does not turn black, for the skin is very delicate in places, and you will see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has touched the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or in the cloth.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is in labor, he feels great pain but not too much.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if he is in the loom, he feels sudden pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this cure does not disturb the eyes, it comes to be that the patient is sad.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then draw up the flesh or abscess, and then heat the cauterization that is similar to a thorn, of which the form is:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize until the knuckle is burned, and it goes away quickly, as long as the friction is all firm.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment, according to the treatment of fluids as long as it is healthy.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is necessary only that this cauterization be used by no one but those who have studied medicine for a long time, and through these hands, these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Can it be done boldly, and I seem that it is not worth leaving.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Dou cauterization of plasters
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make from aristole roots cauteries, and in the same way:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take an aristole root as long as you can find, the largest one, and make it dry, and make it as big and long as your two fingers:
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And grind it into oil, and put it on fire, and cauterize the cautery between the force and the col, and two small cauteries in descending in the part which is dried by the beard:
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and II cauteries between the fifth rib and the seventh, on descending towards the back;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and I cauterize the hip, and I other at the stomach, and I between II shoulders, and II are the deformed cautery that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but make it open as you smell;
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And no ancient says that no man uses fire cauterization like the scarifier, and they squeeze it and put it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and flee the pain, if it is like we said in the abscess of the belly;
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is no pain or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be saved.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not benefit, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	There is a way to do it if you make three or four burns, according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the cauterization of the fat that we have mentioned before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on all the burn, and let the patient be on his side.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way to cauterize if you wash the burn that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and gently touch the bone that is where the hair is, or the painful part of the patient comes from the outside, and the elevations you make to the bone according to the bone, according to the length of the chest, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the chest.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After burning the two nerves until they are felt from the other side, then take the cautery, and then it will be used in four places.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, if you cauterize all the cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten colic due to long tenacities, and this is what the other treatments before said.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, for it is called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries on the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the intestines, and one on the back near the spine, and one on the anus.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Et let the cauterization be well near the edge of the ear.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cauterization open, allow the patient to have a long bath and do not let the doctor see the patient after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And the healing will be faster, and the two intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cauterization is on the belly, it is the clavicle that we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And on the back it is olive-colored, according to what is placed in front of it.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the enflaming of the wounds
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are contracted to the one that is hydropathic, and are plain yellow, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricle and the anus.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And gently place your hand with the fire cautery so as not to turn it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in front, otherwise the patient's skin will be burned, and the cauterization should be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After making two cauteries on each leg at the sharp tip;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and the longer one, cut off the foreskin in front and the other facing backwards on the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries long enough to cure, as it is in its place;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vitamins and digestive enzymes that are in the stomach and intestines are swollen and cannot be treated by usual methods;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	You see the patient suffering greatly and of great courage, if I do a proper cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or a cauterization on the stomach, the cauterization circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And I do four cauterizations on the belly subtly at all the subtle cauterization clavicles, and I do two cauterizations on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see much moisture and the patient is suffering, make the fire cautery on the point, and the cautery on each side, and the cauteries on the stomach below the great belly button, because the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the embolisms are or fundaments, or one or more, and they are old and are of large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit if I do cauterizations:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	The third line of the text translates to: "He then inserts the spine of the doe, which is completely free and not very thick, and he uses the fire cautery on the boudoir twice.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	The fourth line of the text translates to: "And if you think that his stomach is cool, and the meat is not cooked, and the face begins to swell, then the face that is first cauterized is the stomach, as it is said, and the other is the liver, and the other is the gallbladder on all the cauterization plates.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	The fifth line of the text translates to: "And he leaves the cauterization over long ten.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the wound has healed to the point of being healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chalcedony which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you encounter a burn, if the cauterization appears to be too harsh, and then apply it evenly on the affected area.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave your hand there until the cauterization burns at the vein's birth, without cutting.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if it does not help, then cauterize again as we have advised.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatment of wounds, as soon as they are healthy.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cauterization iron on the skin, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear tightening or opening, which we will tell you in his case, if he comes to a more serious illness that cannot be cured by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and has sweat and putrid milk, if you provide enough of this subtle tent, and make sure to hold the entire tent as much as it has to.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After rinsing the cauterization iron that appears to be too harsh, and cut it through the fistula according to the amount that it tries and enters, and reapply the cauterization as soon as the corners are rough and corrupt, once or twice, depending on the amount of burning.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula is located in the course of the vein and the intestine, and if this is done, and it is only done in the flesh, and believe that it is not a serious matter.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After the wound is healed as much as it can be, and if the wound is cleaned, and the materials are long and tough, then you can be sure that the wound is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not long and tough, then you can be sure that the wound is deep, and the bone is broken at the root.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And as one of these we will say in his shoulder.
de la maladie des reins	The disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain in the head comes on, and is accompanied by large ventosity, and there is no woman available, then it is necessary that you cauterize the head with the clavicle on both sides as we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize in the environment, then there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is full and weak with pain and moisture, if the midwife retains the urine, then it is necessary to cauterize in the part near the bladder on both sides of the vesica, where the hair grows, and on the left and right, and each cauterization is like one of our fingers.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And I make a fire cautery on the back, either you or I do it for you in a gentle manner.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cautery be done according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, if it causes great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Therefore, it is recommended to do the third cautery outside the belly, as we have said, or a cautery of the bladder, and then a fire cautery on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cautery be done according to what we have said.
de la hainche	The second sentence to translate is "de la hainche
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the cheek of the jaw, and for this reason if it remains motionless in its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the bones are in the wrong department, if you must cauterize the patient's shoulder at the corner of the jaw, and you should cauterize around the bone before the corner, so that the corner turns the circle; if the jaw is in the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it is cauterized like those we have cauterized, the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cauterization is not present, make three olive-shaped cauterizations on the knee, and it should be cauterized as all the knees.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the patient is healthy, the treatment continues.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the chest
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the shoulder bone, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Therefore, it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors with fetid pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After I have done the cauterization:
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the manner of cauterization is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	It is necessary to know that the medicines are burned together and the fire cauterization is performed.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery, if it is done incorrectly, has ways such as these:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	If you are cauterizing the bend of the horse's hoof, do it in this way: Triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make a good depth and large size, and let there be space between each cauterization like a dot, and it should be olive-colored.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never has cauterization been done on the sole of the hoof, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if it is done at the cauterization circle we have mentioned in the dislocation of the hoof.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But make it in a way that the circles contain the entire face, and all the spears are according to how they should be.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the manner in which one treats sciatica, when the pain remains in the buttock and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And when it comes to the thigh and leg, if the surgeon says that the pain is from the cauterization, then cauterize at the ankle four times on the side opposite the pubic bone.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And if it is the cauterization of the cuticle, and if the pain is great, then
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the surgeon feels that the pain extends to two or three points or near the question, then cauterize at the point or three points that are called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if the skill is lacking, I will do more of it.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If the pain is in the groin and moves towards the thigh, perform cauterization using a circular or cutting instrument, and take good care of all your cauterizations so that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen others who have cauterized on the ankle and burned so much that the entire leg became swollen, and the foot as well, and it was noticed and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the stomach which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	If the pain is in two parts assembled, perform cauterization on both, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise said in the cauterization of the thigh, whether it is like this, make it such and let it be as big as some nail's head or a smaller one, and let it be by intersections and let it be between intersections as much as the quantity of a new pouch.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the intercostals be overlapped by two parts, and also like noses, and it should have one handle of well-made iron.
et c’est li forme:	and it is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and it should be washed as much as it is all red and wet, and then put on the handle of the malady's shoe, and it should be turned around on the clean chest.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and it is cauterized once the cautery is re-heated and left for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a poultice of burrs, and leave the wound open long tenacious.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use little of this cauterization due to the fear of its effects, and few use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and all that is cruel cauterization, which can be endured, and either it hurts or not.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The ardent cauterization is if you have an instrument with sharp points inserted in the corner of the door, and it is either of iron or of steel, with a length of several fingers, and at the top it has II us, and between each point, the quantity of growth of a doe.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be overwhelmed and united, and they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the handle of the axe in the shoulder of the patient who is gripping it with both hands, and pressing your hand firmly on the handle of the axe.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After putting the axe between the two circles of the hot water that is heated in the firepot, and leaving it for an hour without movement, and the patient suffers from fever and arsenic poisoning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it gives off a burning sensation as if from fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the burning sensation has passed, you will feel your hand with the instrument and raise the axe of hot water gently, and leave it for three hours, and put it on as soon as the black part of the bandage is osteotomized.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it remain for three days before feeding again.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the aid on the side after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that matches what you have done in the shoulder.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the way of the hot iron, and I have written or treated about the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Prepare acid and live fire, as much of one as of the other, and mix them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or there is a small hole made by a sharp point that can be entered with a razor.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put some of this on the other and make it well mixed with alkali and chalk and soft powder until you have enough for your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And he leaves it thus until it descends and becomes weak and chilly or can bleed, then take all of this down and wet it with vinegar and alkaline soaps as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And when it will be weak and become moist in the mouth of medicines and in other cauteries of members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes the work of fire like sticks and if other medicines are used well on the heel, such as anacardium and chalk with vinegar and soap, all these things will melt together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a remedy by which some were cured of the pain in the cheek and sciatica, and he says that no other remedy is needed, and that it was effective once for every time this remedy was applied, and he was bathed in the same way as he instructed afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And then in this way that you prick the patient with a fresh and dry verdant leaf and let the blood flow with a little grease, and put it on the heel, knee, and leg where the pain is, and hold it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And it leaves it for three hours, by the amount that the patient no longer feels the pain.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then, I will make him enter a bath as much as his chest is raised, and then I will let him lie down, and the pain will all leave and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And advise that no one should use such a hot cauterizing medicine after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Diacorides says that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the hoof of a goat, it helps to relieve the pain.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it must be made in the following way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the linen and oil it, and put it in the socket that is between the thumb and little finger and the other which is called the fossil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After drying the goat hoof, and burning it until it is charred, and then putting it on wool, and leaving it as long as it remains stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and then reapply, and continue to apply as long as you feel by touch that it is going towards the hoof, and that the pain is subsiding.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And these methods of cauterization are called "beaver cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by touching or drumming or from too much evacuation, or from the expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, rather it is for the one who has come from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after the patient has been freed from the fetid or other pills, that the doctor places his hand on the patient's back, where the pain holds, and makes three lines with a knife, and in each line, cauterizes or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And it is done with the cauterization according to the point called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the cauterization clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often affects many children, and the signs of its beginning are that they constrict their eyes when they are born, and cry.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you thrust your spine into the floor and into its appearance that comes from the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it cured, if it is burned at the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cautery darkens each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if it is burned at the spine with the fire cautery pricking two or three lines, and they are points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the wound as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and if you do not want to perform a burn in silk that is in the spine of the neck.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain from joints due to moisture expands to every part of the body and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and remedies of medicines do not cure it, it is cured by cauterization in a certain way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the head of the cauterization at the joint of the foot, and the olive-shaped cauterization according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it is necessary that you prick the face with a sharp object, then perform the cauterization on the entire cauterization as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come to the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, I advise you to cauterize each knee with three or four points of the cauterizing iron on all the olive cauterization points.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you have more skill, but do not hold your hand for as long as the pain lasts, it will be too late.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	If the pain descends to the joints and back, apply the cauterization we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points every two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there is no pain left, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	When the pain comes suddenly or in the shoulder, if it is cauterized on each part, and I give good government to the patient and prescribe medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make the midwife give medicine and purge the poison, she will be healthy in the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of a sinew
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a fracture comes in twists, and the bones hang down like rags, and it is new, if it happens that when you see to cure it, it will not take from him the best of his youth.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that make the stomach loose, so that the belly descends from it.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after you have placed him on his back between your hands, and he commands that he shave his hair as much as the bowels are repaired, and you pull out to his legs, and sign that the fracture is set on the bone, and at all signs that it seems like half of a circle to the corners of the two corns;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then rinse the fire cautery, and it is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and has a taste.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then remove the bung from its base;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and it marks your hand as not returning easily;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a bandage on him and a sling on his arm, and another on the leg that marks the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery sign on all your hand, and hold it firmly and as long as you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, continue another until you touch the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and make sure the feces does not come out while you are doing the fire cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	and do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it should be done subtly according to the size of the child, and also according to the size of adults.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, cure the head of the shoulder as much as possible until the pain subsides.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the treatment of other ointments as much as possible until it is healthy, and apply the cream for 40 days on the back until the pain is well soothing.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	The translation of the line is: "And it is necessary that his wounds be left open for a long time, so that the wounds do not ooze when he rises from bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	The translation of the line is: "And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, he should tie a well-made bandage around his waist, and every other day.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	The translation of the line is: "and he should rest well, so that he works quickly and does not have too much intoxication from drinking and smoking, and does not overbake.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	The translation of the line is: "And when he makes this instruction, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the trimming in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When hernias occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, if you want to cauterize, you should do it according to the quantity of the fire cautery, and so it is for the third part of the hernia.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And no of the old ones have said that one should cauterize with the fire cautery at III angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign of the bone is the fracture and draw a line for the length of the rupture, and another for the width, and hold the patient's hand tightly at all points of the cauterization claw.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	However, the first cauterizations are more gentle and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of pain in no member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, whether from cold or wounding, and this pain lasts long, and the cure with medicine is not enough, then it must be cauterized at the cauterization called "points", and the cauterization according to the length of the member, its width, its strength, its virtue, its location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is safe with the first fire cautery, it is well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If this is the name, continue with another fire cautery on it, because the custom is that one must die in the member that it is nearest, but if you want to do the cauteries as long as the patient is safe.
de meselerie	of malediction
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The curses are never helped by burning once, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	You can see the cauterization, when the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not increase or decrease, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, therefore I do the cauterization on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I emmi the head quite deeply, and the other at the end of the wound.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and I suspend it at the two corners, and I pull on the hanger.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I pull so hard on my hand that the cauterization sticks to the bone, and so that the pus comes out quickly, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And the cauterization is done on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the scarring is everywhere sparse.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if the scarring is manifestly present, then you must first cauterize with these cauterizations that we have mentioned or chief, and I cauterize in some places, and II cauterizes at the corner of the elbow, and VI cauterizes at the corner of the back, and I grant at the croupe and I other delez, and II sus the II espaules;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And II suspend the knees, and II suspend the tendons of the big toe, and I suspend each joint of the hands and feet, and suspend the holes of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and you cut off the nerves that are under the heel, which you do not burn.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never made a cauterization on the bone, and the other on the stomach, and the other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And you advise that the more you do cauterization, the more help you get, and it benefits you.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And you advise that the patient does not feel any pain during cauterization if the surgeon feels none, because the corps is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the burn be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the head with flour several times with honey and other remedies as long as it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When the member is inflamed and cured by medicines and ointments and plasters, and it is not healthy, therefore I do cauterization on the member according to its size and thickness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let there be a small amount of fire cautery inserted into the skin.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, the care of wounds as soon as it is safe.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never make a cautery on the hand, arm, or back, at the end of which the member becomes quiet and if it is infected.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And nothing else happens if it is not known about the limbs and the movements of the muscles in the corpse.
de albaras	2. Of scars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the physician's engine does not work, then let there be a small amount of fire cautery inserted into the skin, according to the quantity of the healthy skin, as long as the blenching is quiet and has its color.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then the treatment of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and salve of colic and almond, of each a part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make the whole assembly, and bind with a cloth, and apply as needed to the shoulder until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore first appears, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done at the cauterization point that seems to be a circle, then turn it completely around the entire sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all say that you make cauterization also at the mileau of a glandulent ulcer.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And all say that this is not good, because I doubt that it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted it to happen never.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the most correct thing is that they be cauterized externally, at the cautery called "circle," as we have said in our mouth of cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", it delays in dying either due to the excess it causes or because of the greatness of the patient's malady when they are old (that is, too many) and lacks blood, or for tightness.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see that they are near death.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	However, the cauterization is done by pricking with small cauters.
aprés le laisse ensi.	after it is left alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will lag in measuring.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it lagging in measuring, if the cauterization is hot and this form is not suitable,
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is perceived by the ear, and it is such that the patient feels pain in a certain way that the course of the sweat is agile.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, if it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cauterization by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a mangy of the limb, because it eats the limbs as much as it does the dry sticks.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the shoulder that can suffer from fire cauterization, then sharpen the cauters small and large according to what is needed for the shoulder or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cauterization of all parts as much as you remove all corruption, nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted is not ossified.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it remain for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil as much as the burned eschar is large, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the care of burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy children are not born, it's bad.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if this does not happen, then resume the cauterization on those who have not yet removed the corrupted hairs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this disease has never been cured by medical care in the place of fire cauterization.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said that the cure of the disease by dividing:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take what you have skill in.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the pores that come as pimples
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that the pimples are caused by inflammation, which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that darkens the skin.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is known as fire cauterization, and hot iron cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	If you are shaving, then the fire cautery is like a pen made of iron, and it should be made in such a way that it can penetrate all parts, and have subtle margins.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After you put the cautery on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And leave the nail for three days until it starts to exude pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of boiled hazel twigs with silk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall off and be separated from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by defluxion of the core, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then you must have a hot iron cauterization.
et est en teil maniere:	And it is in such a way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take an iron nail or a piece of wire, and put it on the nailhead and the neck, which is to remove warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And if it boils all over, then he puts a hot wax, and holds your hand well, and presses your hand while turning so that the edge of the nail reaches the root of the nail, and you can find the hot wax way properly at the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	The patient suffers a little from the hot needle for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then it is left alone, and it will rot completely at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I will create another step, as long as you are able to handle all of these, then cure the wounds that have been inflicted with fire.
li cure dou trembler	I will cure you so you do not tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When any tremble from cold or nerves, or fever, and it happens that you must apply four cauteries or four on the spine, one cauterization between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And if you apply a cautery or poultice, and at the stomach with the olive cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If it allows the trembling to continue, and it will suffer the symptoms of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pimples that have been inflicted with fire.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	For no time do blisters or pustules appear on the body, which come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If it is necessary to do the first when they appear that a fire cautery is made on each tip of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery of marten's wax, or if the tip is burned at the fire, or at the cautery of Aristotle's root, or at the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never is the cauterization done at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and it cannot grow hair forward, but it is disrupted by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the arrow is seized
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Often there are great discrepancies in the blood of the artery that is covered by the wound that comes to the perforators, or the incision of the abscess, or the burn of the member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a great sorrowful thing to putrefy.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And whenever there is none, if you have to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until the pain is assuaged by your index finger and no more blood comes out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put the olive-wood cauterys, both small and large, on fire until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then I, according to the size of the wound and the strength of the limb, either cut or make a small incision, and follow the artery with the cautery until it reaches the point where you hold your thumb, and hold the cautery as long as it is not exhausted.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If it is hot when you tighten the vein with your child's head, and the cautery ends, then quickly take another cautery that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And continue to do this until the wound is completely closed.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and make sure you do not burn the flesh that is already dead, and avoid other harm to the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and be careful that when the artery is not cut, it cannot be well healed immediately, unless it is by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	Or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by tightening the thread, or by medicines placed on which have caused pain;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it is tied and extracted unexpectedly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will carefully manage the remaining of the thread, or to put things burning on, or other similar things, should not profit from it if not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to none and there is no medicine present, then he should put his index on the wound as we have said, and firmly clamp down until it is painful in the wound and in the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and he should not move much, but the cold is often too cold that it freezes and becomes swollen and painful;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make queries before those of which it has skill in cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	Our advise is that in the first chapter of any disease, if it is necessary to use fire cauterization or ardent medicines, we must know the causes, the effects, the shapes, and the methods of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have written the first chapter of minor surgeries, and I will enter this chapter by my own way because it is more lightly done than the other.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	However, before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If those who were ill with such diseases came with their malady, and died lightly from the severity of their disease, and the greatness of their wickedness;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	then we should fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of those who say to you this, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am ready.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is inevitable.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It only requires your consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more than just your honor at stake in your covenant, and do not surrender unwisely but wisely of that which you are certain, and of that which you could have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	et use use prognosis and indication in the cures of your patients, according to their health.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and may help you achieve this good reputation, glory, and memory of the long-lasting.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very fine thread, our Lords give you understanding and straightness, and if you wish to hope for the holy inspiration of her hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in stating that it is a cauterization, according to the cauterizations, which I have commanded for the chief joints, because you will find it more lightly than other things.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dough, chief full of acid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	It is said that this disease comes from time to time in children at the breast, and when the child is pulled too hard on the head.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and never comes from a cured cause that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease happen except in children, and among those I have seen, it has always led to death.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and therefore it seems to me that I should leave this chapter in part cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	I saw the child crying because the head was painful, and the father tightened it every time he could not endure it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and thought so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled between the bone and the sinew, from the knee to the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the wounds are such that the moisture is between the knee and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you should cut out the father a wide gash.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and so long as the swelling corresponds.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the form of the spatulum.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more intense, and the abscess is larger, if I make these cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is drying out the bone, and you see the signs of the corners of the chief being overturned on each part, and it suddenly jumps when you press on it with your hand, and this has not been reported to you before:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you cut off the chief III ends according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After pulling out the chief III ends, and then soaking them in wine and oil, and leaving them for five days:
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then, dress the wound with compresses and poultices, and let the chief be evenly shaved, and then re-insert it into the dry flesh as much as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incising is to look at or open the size of the abscess, and assemble the angle;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for no time has it ever been before;
aucune fois derrier;	no time has it ever been behind;
aucune fois en destre;	no time has it ever been to the left;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and no time has it ever been to the right;
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore, measure the size of the abscess opening and the assembly of the angle, and make it according to what you have at hand;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be warned that you do not cover the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and come quickly if the patient dies of blood loss due to blood loss and evacuation of fluid;
de reume	from remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease called "cataract" that appears in the eyes or the nose, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, therefore it is treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient makes his head.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the leg with a coarse cloth as much as possible, making the blood vessels visible, then the patient should pull the shoulder muscles tightly with all the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at whether the vein is bleeding, and the blood from both sides are after the ears, and they are quickly stopped.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then sign the joints as they swell, and apply one and the other with a sharp spatula of II parts, as the size comes close to the bone, and this is by the wide shoulder.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	2. And if you see, cut the cloth over the artery and cover with the sponge, by cutting as much as the two doses.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is pricked, if it bleeds continuously without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open with feeling, then it comes that you measure the quantity of the space of III doses, then enlarge and fit to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and if it comes that sixth doses should be given if there is more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound.
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the wound does not come off the bone, and the dressing that was applied does not come off, then tighten the wound and tie it, and the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy.
de emigrainne	The first line of the text is "de emigrain
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the head aches and is hot, and there are gouts of blood and tears in the temples, and the pain becomes severe, and it is treated with medicines and all sorts of remedies, but they do not help, then we cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of removing them if the patient makes the hair on his temples stand on end, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, since it opens well by its beating, and is quickly reponded to than in any other men who are too faint;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is responded to, then draw the collar of the patient's shirt, then rub the neck with a rough cloth, and wipe the neck with hot water until the artery opens clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scorch the leather lightly until you see the artery, then pull it up with tweezers, and cut off as many threads as there are from each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is subtle, then the wound at the tip of the nail will be according to the number of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	If it is not caught, then it will not be held at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And take out five pints of blood, about three
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then cut it in two with a strong silk thread, so that no blood comes before the wound, and it will come out discharging blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut the excess that is between the two lines in that hour, and then, if you see, if it burns, then use a cauterizing iron as much as the heads are cut off.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And it is the patient's task to lie still, and if they do not have fever and are of a warm complexion, then it is well.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauterization helps to end the moisture.
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, it is necessary to remove the veins that fill the shoulder with much cotton and place them on well-made tents.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you dislodge them, use dry medicines that make the skin red and tents as much as necessary until it is healthy.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if there is no cort for the artery as much as you can, if you have to cauterize, or use your shoulder of vitrol and hold it in your hand that it does not become stained.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	If you do not have this presently, then put your hand on the joint as much as possible, and make it cold with ice as much as possible, and hold it steady as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	What is more dangerous and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cautery, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer on the pain.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the wound is too large, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two cuts a large space, and then when you see the two ends closing, hold the fire hot until it reaches the bone, and cover the vein in the two ends.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they should be moved away from the two heads because it is not a matter of this cauterization in general.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and it is the form of cauterization:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the hairs are falling down from the veins that are being cut by the hot iron of the fire, and it does not profit at all from medicine as we can see, and the patient's face is twitching, and you see the masseter muscle trembling, and it seems like a seizure;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and the hair is thin and moist so that the hair on the paper is cut, and the papers are torn, and burned by the heat of the tears, if it has to do with this treatment;
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the "old bruise treatment", and that is what you must do for the patient who has this disease, to cut off the hair that he has or on his face, then I made three incisions or on his face equally according to the length of his face.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and so one of the incisions is made in the same way as the other on the side of the face by advancing the knife a little, and the others are cuts made with the paper, and take care not to make an incision on the arteries that are made with the paper.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuation of the other jaws, and each wound should have three to the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and make a piece of sponge and wring out some cloths on the sore, then dip the spongue in hot water of two parts of this, and it will form like this:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision that goes into the temple just as the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scorch all that is between the two fences of the whole face that is on the bone, then make another part of the second incision just like the other second, and then draw out this spongue.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If blood flows in the first cauterization using the instrument called "cultellary," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, do not cut it, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the blade towards the horn, and the costeit becomes blunt towards the bone, and the blood stops when it reaches the first cauterization.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut off all the veins that descend from the cheek as much as the incision is continued until it opens the eye, and then make another part of the second fence just like the other.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	Then the pain is eased perfectly, and the bone is expressed for the blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then a thin cloth tent is placed in each wound, and softened linen cloths soaked in wine and oil are placed on top, and they make sure that the incisions do not bleed.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day, the linen is removed, and a large amount of Aqua Tede is applied, then the wound is treated with Balsam Basilicon with Olive Oil, and other remedies for wounds are applied until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	This translates to: "He pulls out the hairs.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	If no blood comes out of the wound, you see the hairs shriveled and bitten, and the eyes swollen, and the papers burned.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	When the hair grows long and is pricked, and the patient feels great pain, and the physician extracts it.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	However, these accidents are not common for those materials and their catharsis only comes from many veins, and the physician cures it if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	This translates to: "And is it that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut on his forehead, and another wide one in the cheek?
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begins with the cutting of the left temple to the right temple, and it is the incision that reaches the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and separates your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at the mingling.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is discovered, if all the blood comes out onto an sponge, and then places between the two lips of the cut and puts cotton on top, and wraps it in linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then apply a mixture of softened wax and oil, and keep it away from fire.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When the bone is healed, if it comes to pass that you rub the bone as much as possible until it starts to become hard and then the treatment of things that cause inflammation, which irritate the bone.
En teil maniere:	In this way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of linen, and make a paste.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And apply it to these wounds to relieve inflammation for all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear's chill
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that affects the ears is one of the four things.
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Or grains, or beasts, or mines, or similar things if they can be done.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	If, as before, you sow, then with fire, wheat, or barley.
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	If it flows, as before, like cold and damp, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When he pierces the ear drum or any other part of the ear that does not fit well, or grows in the ear, he should put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the wound, if no drop of blue or red oil is drawn out, then the extraction is performed.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And I apply a plaster made of condensing substance, and it smokes the nostrils when it is applied coming, and I put on the ear pieces of linen or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and it stays on the ear.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times, it comes out by this treatment.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out, then the extraction is performed with fine tweezers, and the form is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If she jumps with force, it's bad.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If he does not, then if he insists on the subtle extraction of the stone with little force.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if she does not jump, then if I make a pinch with a thorn and bite the end of the ring or the ear hole, and extinguish it which is inside the waxed ring so that it cannot enter with the ring.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the treatment will be formed, because it often comes as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come in the same way, then he takes glue from the animal and takes the eyes, and puts nothing on any instrument that is not for this purpose, and puts a piece of cotton inside.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press on the gluteus muscle where the incision was made or wherever it is, and pull out the foreign object.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out of any of these things that we have said, and you do not break the ear but only cause pain, spasm, and tightness.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of cutting if you do it first for the shoulder blade, and remove the bone according to its strength, then hold the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear towards you, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and so it is like a moon, as long as you go to the hole, then the bone according to your pain, and the blood flows heavily in your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure as soon as it is safe.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grains that are engorged and oozes, then administer the extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot be drawn out, then administer this remedy according to its form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not make haste until you think the grain is moist from the earwax, as soon as you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then the extraction is done with fine tweezers and sugar, if as we have said, if the extraction is successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, if the grain is in the ear, then the surgeon should use the first condyles for exsternum, and ample the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let there be scarring on the same ear or the eye.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then many piers are needed according to the length of your member, and they should be light and easy to remove, and they are washed with fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And he puts the patient's ear on a loop of his own ear, and it comes out from there. Of its other parts, and with great care, from another pierce that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And he continues to do this pierce after pier until the wound is completely healed, and then it jumps and becomes completely healed.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	When you see that the joint is dislocated, and take hold of one of the bones in the ear, and the other bone is held by fire as much as the more painful joint is,
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then continue to repair other joints until they are all aligned, as we have described in the wound.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small and like a pin, and is treated as we have described in the division,
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large and can be felt, then it should be treated like a dental extraction.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the more gentle procedure when done in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	When extracting the ears of infants, if you clean them as we have said in the division and when treating distillations, but the cure does not benefit, then look at the ear with the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are no openings, if you use gentle tweezers, and if it does not appear, then take the rope of us, as it is in this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight and wide.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And cut off the more gentle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then completely form the rope;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often as you see it.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey, then the cotton thread will be cut off as I have said in the incision.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not become loose as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients used in the incision of the verses, and you will find or use distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, then the form will be as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let silver or gold threads be inserted into the small holes in the skin, and then distilled.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press the distillation onto the well-made silver instrument, and if you see the rashe and wrap around the pointed end of the cotton thread.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then you sweat your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the chain, and the chain is in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then put the lotion on all the cloth, and press your hand together until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And it feels the ointment of the salves, and the distillations are not hot, but they are distilled in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And keep it from being too cold, as the medicine would not work if it were.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear's chill
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have purulent otitis.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	This same thing happens due to fainting from pain, or from the ear being cut off, and these faints do not occur once in the ear, unless one can see.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No one has ever seen a puff of blood, but it is well seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes suddenly, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of serious illness in many cases, and then it is necessary to put the painful ear near the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look at:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the apparent inflammation, if the wound has completely healed, then this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be known and understood from all sides before and behind, so that it does not cause the ear to bleed.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the exfoliation of the ear is due to a thin layer of hair or a part of the ear, and if you use gentle forceps and a light touch, as long as the hair is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the inflammation is on the edge of the ear, if you have a gentle rasp and a light cope, then you heat it slightly and place it on the ear's side.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the exfoliation that the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the ear drum.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then insert a tent according to the large pustule in the ear, and apply Egyptian ointment to it.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	1. Do not cause any pain as long as the wound is sore, or take a tent and moisten it with hot water, and sprinkle some pulverized vitrol on it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	2. If you see the ear is wet, then take the tent and put it in a damp tent made of oil and wax, as long as the ear remains moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. Then the treatment will be complete when it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. And if the blood comes out, then dip a sponge and wet it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	The first sentence to translate is "Or cautere de feu comande
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	4. That is the one that comes in paper from the hairs when they are wet and dry, if you extend them with needles and tweezers, and cover them with a cotton ball of its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then he puts pressure on the elbow with a hot iron.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if he does not have it, then the fire cautery of the fine loop is used, and the cautery iron is applied after the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And they are often repaired, with no cure for their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are burned by fire, those roots are destroyed and do not return.
de la gresle	of the grit
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times, things come out of the eyes that seem to be wrinkled in their form and hardness, and for this reason it is called "granulation," and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper of the eyes and the eyelids.
li ovraiges est telz:	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'ils soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent.
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	When the patient is heavy on one side and cannot move, it is a light thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	If the wound is wide, then it is lightly burned in each part, then it is taken with tweezers and the cloth.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not cover it with paper, it will not hurt the patient much;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, it should be stitched together with a stitch, and it should be cared for until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, it should not be forced, because the surrounding skin will restore itself too much and become rough.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the grain of sand descends into the ear, and it is turned upwards towards the part inside, if reversed, and the grain is held with tweezers, and the cloth presses from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the grain is pressed, if the salty ointment is lifted from the wound, and the shoulder is cleaned with this until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is engraved on the papers of the eyes, and this happens more often in children, and causes pain to their eyes, and they come to the catheter in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears flow into their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	For this reason, they lie down with their faces away, they sleep, and their papers are soaked with the ointment that enflames and appears to have covered the wound that was opened in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand on your head and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the operation is that the surgeon places his head in your hand.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And then he takes a cloth and makes a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exudate from each part, and then he puts it on.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And he presses with his two hands on both sides, so that the exudate is assembled in the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then, in the environment of moisture, a sharp stone is cut, making a large wound, and it is not larger than the wound made during the cleaning of the vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and then the leather is cut so that you can see the excretion.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in various preparations, excrement comes from the wound, in the form of a greasy, pimple-like mass.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Pull the cloth all around your two thighs, and turn your right and left hands as much as it spreads.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and make sure you do not aggravate the wound, that you do not see all over the skin, that you do not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if it does not open at the beginning of the foreskin, then slightly lighten the foreskin until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then cut it with a sharp and hot knife, and place it on the skin, and draw it out gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who have hairy scalps put on oil to corrupt the moisture that is dried.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure, as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient comes to the aid of an abscess, if the doctor uses cleansing ointments as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers' hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on paper that are not of its nature, and are awake, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears and mucus secretions from the skin and cornea, until it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And the cure is according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	For the fire cauterization, or by medical treatment according to the following, and it is made or by incision and stitching or by ties, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your left hand, then turn the paper around the oil to your right hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is turned, it is done.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, then insert an enema through the entire tube.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	And it should be that the margin of the paper or the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the tube through all the paper, and turn it towards the nail.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then, in the part of the body that is not covered by clothing, comb out the hair, and apply it evenly to all parts of the body, from the large to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then, take out the thread and wrap it around the hair, and then place a small tent made of cotton and silk on the paper, as if it were a bow, and if you see that the figure is not according to the quantity you see being raised by the paper that is designed to be so.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if in some part of the body where you have skill, you find that there is a large quantity of paper according to what the paper is molded.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then, following all the lines you have written, and start with the largest possible incision just;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and make it one of the fissures near the natural hairs in its growth, then cut the tendon at one of the two angles, then scrape it all;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then sew the two lips together with a stitch of a needle at the end of the fine hair, and drain the blood, and dry the excess of the threads on the corners of the eyebrows for everything glands, if you see this done;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then leave the stitch and the threads just as they are, or three to four;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then cure the wound with things that are dry and constricting, for the paper relaxes in the moisture of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is threadbare (as they say the old ones); it is difficult to bear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you sign the paper of a figure that is also like the flesh of meat, as we have experienced, at III bones you will follow the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes the one who surpasses with equal strength according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the tacks, and the thing is not equal, then take an awl or if it has one, and pull out the figure.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and pull out another wire of the great lariat, and the second wire of the small one, and assemble the two threads correctly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then gently your hand correctly, and gently all the leather wherever you have signed, as we have experienced, then stitch the two lips of the wound with sewing, and treat it until it is healthy.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	When the abscess comes to your incision, if the pain of cutting and wound healing relieves.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And never has it happened that the hair of the paper is converted.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If you must use what we have said about the incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	However, the stitching in both is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of dogs if it follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And if you were to convert the paper and make it according to what I have said, and then make the dogs by hand, and they are as thin and long as the paper and the widest part of the stomach is.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and hold as you hold the heads of the parts where you keep the strings;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then carefully assemble the other end of each string with the paper of the oil, and tighten the threads of the two parts;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave no slack, and the leather that is stretched will become hard and brittle and crack, as long as it is under pressure;
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes time, if the hold is tight, then treat it as soon as it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is healed and the paper is lifted, and no more hair will grow;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the second cut that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The tissue is such that you need a fine needle, and one end of a silk thread is fine and smooth;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then assemble the heads and knot them gently, and make the length of the threads equal to a palm of length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order in the race the other fine silk thread gently, and tie the heads of the threads;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head in your hand;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And if the sun is shining so that the cuts are declawed, because they are small and thin, then take the needle and pass it through all the threads in the race at the end of the hair, and draw it through the paper as much as you pull out the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then, remove the hair until the base, and cut off that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then, remove your hand as the hair grows to cover all the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the hair is treated and the hair does not come with it, then you will cut off the hair at the end of all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the hair grows with pain and you see it by the sight of the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Therefore, if you cut off the hair and the thread, and close the oil and leave it for two or three days, as the hair grows in its place and the wound is born;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is shortened, then accompany it with long hair of its natural length, and let it be cut when it grows out.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fat
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	Regarding this disease called "aleacrati" or the discharge comes in oil, if it has two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	1. Natural way, and 2. Unnatural way.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes by wounding, or cutting, or burning, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of the healing is to cut off that glue, and clean the lips, and put lint on it, and keep it until it is healthy.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And nothing else is needed but to use things that dry and restrict in the treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	If you do this, it may lead to a worse illness than the first.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	However, if I do things that are softening, like figs.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And if the mouth of the wound is open and the seeds of flax are cooked, and the ointments made from dill are not found in any oil, and a tent is made around it, then the treatment for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your treatment is that you guard it so that it does not sound like according to its form before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the things we have said are not true that there is no remedy for this disease, that it does not recur according to its form before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "acaratia" truly is called "acaratia", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wounding and cutting and burning and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	If you prick with a needle, and it has two threads, and the thread in the chart, and I make it feel on the opposite side of the arm, so that the threads come to the head of the chart.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the chart is at the end of all the needle, and the cap is wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the limb is drawn back according to the rule, it is correct.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, then take the ruler and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two or three wounds according to the thickness of the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and be the heads of the two flaps of the two angles of the incision you made, and make some angles so that when they are assembled, it looks like a letter that does not have "I griesche";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then that char, according to the quantity of its cost, which is as much as the paper, then adjust the two loose parts, and the cost of a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure of what we have said about the mollifying medicines and tents, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a flat cut of the hair from the papers according to what is before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then, between the two shoulders of a tent, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And it should be done according to the form of the disease, as it is different in form, and the masters' tools are adapted to everything that can come back to its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient himself, according to what is needed for cauterization and excision in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	I should have said "should" instead of "shouldn't" in the original sentence. Here
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture is made by women in a certain way, that the paper of it is dipped in white oil and cannot move or make its natural cuts, then it comes to pass that you should sharpen the point of a razor and smooth the paper, and lie it on top.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	When using forceps, as long as you cover what is inserted in the subcutaneous fat, which should not be too thick nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from too much pain nor excessive bleeding.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And make your incision, where you scrape the one assembled, lightly, so that the paper reshapes according to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And the entire assembled piece becomes healthy, and it never has any sharp pain, and it is lifted gently, and warm.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place a layer of linen between the paper and oil, and put on top of the oil soft wool in abundance.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And afterwards, after the third day, use a warm poultice and things that are moist, as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the finger of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Saws that the nail is cut in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and resembles the hard sycamore, and another that is not nervous but resembles a moist, frozen blister, which when touched with iron and cooked with force, if it cannot be opened;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and the one and the other resemble the great alarm, and grow larger and larger as it covers all the vision and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the surgeon places his finger in the patient's throat, then cuts the tongue.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And gently place the paper in your hand, then use the small tweezers to pick up the needle, and hold it in place.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or goat hair, or beef hair, and a strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	And double the point of the needle with your thumb and pull the thread through the finger, and percet the entire needle with the thread and hold it in place with a single thread, and scrape off all the hair from the edge of the finger that touches the silk and the wool at the tip of the finger, then cut away any remaining hair at the root of the nail and subtle skin, and leave the natural or artificial nail, so that by incision there is no flow of tears.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and no time has it been set straight on the finger alone, and as for that, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the scald, we have all the substance soaked, and it is formed like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the substance does not touch the rough cloth and break it, and the prunelle is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, a pot of oil is poured into it, and a cloth soaked in litargire is left to dry for the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the treatment of that which must be done until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the finger is not nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, this appearance of a finger of medicine is often treated.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and if I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, then do the oil of the female physician, and take the light spumous poultice according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And dip the finger subtly, and if you see that it does not soften and the ration is pressed, then distill from your mouth the oil of colde made of litargire and red colde rose and seil broiet, and it stoopes the oil to the other day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then continues the other evacuation according to this same work, as long as it is all complete.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If nothing is against you in the oil, as with an abscess, then the milk, and first cure the abscess as soon as it is healthy, then continue the pricking as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is pale in the oil at night due to great exhaustion, and one part only is affected, not the whole, then tears do not appear.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then it is distilled in the cold-pressed red oil that is made from Litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the wood that was cut down by the prunella
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some people have never seen the color red, and they cut the plums and wrap them in paper and hang them up, and it looks like a rose of balsam.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	When the patient is ready, the surgeon places their head in your hand, then operates on the joints, and tightens all loose screws or nails as possible, and holds it in place with your strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then hold the first joint steady while you tighten all the nails or screws as much as possible, and make sure you don't hurt the patient's arm.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And make the incision as small as possible, which we discussed in the incision of the finger, using gentle force, and it will heal well after this treatment.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and all the joints are healed, if you use oil of sweet almond or distilled red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put a piece of cotton with an earwax plug on it, make sure it is securely closed to prevent infection.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	If it does not cause any harm, and the wound is not infected, and you doubt the aposteme chaut, then leave the oil and cure the aposteme chaut with things that soothe the aposteme chaut.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your home as soon as it is healthy, and then make several charms with oil in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is necessary that you apply the cure of every weak oil of the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in the home of iron.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not insert your hand into any of these homes as long as you see that your limbs are weak in this home.
des voines des eulz	of veins of hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Several veins are red that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye's surface and weaken the oil for all time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	The first sentence translates to: "Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil, and if it is wet, then there is no other disease but the oil.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	However, the treatment is as follows:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to cut their hair at the base of the skull, then treat all wounds according to their knowledge, and make sure the scars are not too deep according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let it be known that one must cut through the flesh according to this form in degrees of one hand:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then you can reset the wounds gently, and remove any remaining oil as needed, until all the wounds are free of oil.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And make sure you do not bleed the oil with sponging, and perform this operation before noon in the sun, and be careful in your operation so that you do not cut any further wounds.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	When you have this done, if you distill it in the green and red ointment to corrupt what is decomposed and not well,
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot distill all of it in that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that calm the pain of the limbs, and leave some parts until the pain is calmed and assured of not being infected, then continue according to this method as long as it is healthy.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the form of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mirror if it calls "arissati" fistula.
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure with cauterization and by applying the burning medicine according to what I have previously mentioned, and it is not well, then it must be removed if it is infected, and all the moisture that is in it, as long as the bone is discovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	When the bone is discovered, you will see corruption and darkness, if all the instruments of this craft are not in its form.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And it is called "sharp head", and it should be made firmly at the head of the tool, and it should be sharp like a knife as it is in its present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place the sharp head of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand as much as you can to make sure that this corruption is cut off.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And do this once, then restore the diseased bone with medicinal excisions.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If you feel pain, and it is swollen, and the belly is also swollen, and it remains for 40 days, and it does not relieve or become less, and no accidents come, be sure that it is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this is not the case, and there is no other means than to return the fistula to the fontanelle according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And if you cut through the bone the second time by force, and with medicines, and when it is discovered if it fits according to this form, and the head of the iron should be at an angle of three, and the fistula should be as thin as possible as you see:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place the head of the iron on the bone, and spread your hand from the oil I pox, then turn the fistula as much as it pierces the bone and feels to the patient as if he holds his hand on his forehead;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the dry medicines of the leg, as I have indicated to you, and when the patient feels the matter in the nail.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the wounds are fully opened and there is no relief in the bladder or constipation, if you cut off the member, then you must cut off the member.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then the wound is cleansed, then it is ventoused or pressed with a haterel without causing pain by being sharp, then it is applied with the oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sandalwood, and then it is strained, and it is applied to bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the dressing if you prescribe enough soft threads, and double each of them four times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the threads can hold.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then the thread is stretched by knotting with a hard thread, and the ventouses resume sucking without hurting.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the ventouses and leave the thread stretched for days and nights, and if it becomes entangled, then you can tighten it.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the knot after days and nights, and if you see that the oil is repaired, it is good.
se ce non;	If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the cauterization resumes, the bandages and the linen and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A sudden pulling or tearing of the eyeball
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disturbances come in the eyeball cloth, then open, and come forth papers as small as a grain of resin, and it is difficult to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you cover your eyes, the treatment is such that you insert an awl at the root of the part that is not so tight, then insert another awl where there is the double thread of the part.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and I make it feel, and leave the first awl according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then pull down the double knot and pull out a part of the urethra, then tighten it well, then remove the needle and put on a smooth oiled piece in abundance of urine.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it as the urethra is with the bladder, then cure the oil with things that are comfortable until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and never has the wound been restricted by the bladder of any part of a circular cloth as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the wounds have a great appearance, then if you pierce with a subtle spatula that comes out of the oil, and remove the moisture and descend the wounds, and enter into it.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the extraction as long as it is safe.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil's gum
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "Alcinnatis" is not worse than boils that are assembled in the oil, appearing as if they are descending, but they are not.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the appearance of the boil if you make sure the patient is lying on their side and straight, then take the head between your hands of II parts, and hold as long as you see the boil coming to the end of your fingers.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then it is incised, and comes down and becomes discomfited, and see the patient's things as they were originally.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	If it does not descend quickly, it is acute, and if it descends from the abdomen, it is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you hold the patient's arm in your hands, then take a soft spatula and continue along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the sclera as long as the abdomen is present.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it comes out, if it is distilled in hot watered oil or honeyed gentian, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oils of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the resemblance of waters in division, and what it comes to perceive.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	If according to nature's health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you place the shoulder between your trustworthy hands, be by the light of the sun, and let the healthy and tight oil;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the paper of the oil in your right hand, if the hairs are on the right side, or in your left hand if they are on the left side.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the hairs are on the right side, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if they are on the left side.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument on the coronet through the thickest part of the glove at the smallest part of the arm, then pull out the instrument called "almagda" with force, and scratch your hand until it penetrates the glove's thickest part, and feel that almagda is inside the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda's hole is at the end of the spacetime that is located in the prunes of the nose.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And it is the coronet of the oil.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal skin, and then place the instrument at the place where it hurts, then press firmly on one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the patient feels dizzy now, if they see the surgeon before them and the instrument in their hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After the child has rested a little and cooled down, the second duct opens, insert the fire with the instrument, and when it is heated and does not rise, gently twist around with your hand a few times.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then insert a few drops of warm oil into the duct, and remove the excess oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then pour the oil into the wounds or soft tissue, and mix it with healthy oil and a little urine, and apply it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kin, put on shoes with many buttons.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil cannot enter through the hair because it is too hard, because there are too many men with very hard hair, then you must use the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And only pierce the conjunctiva, and do not force it too hard, but make a small incision, then twist gently, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And upon completion of the operation, the wound appears to the patient to be healing, and if they lie down on their back in the dark, they fall asleep.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And let there be no movement, and gnaw light meat, and do not move the head to the left or right, and follow its natural position.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then he removes from this dark house, and examines his eyesight, and I show him things, and then he sets the ligament in its proper position.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is only necessary to do this in the eye of the treatment or after the incision now, but it must be done because the inflammation rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If aphthae come, then remove the oil from before the ninth day, and apply the remedy that soothes aphthae.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When they are calmed, if you close your eyes and put your hand on any part of your face to cover any part, it does not matter in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then, enter the house cautiously, and convert yourself into its conditions.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and you advise that no disciple should undergo this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And some came from the region of Yrach, who told us that in some places it was done for the good of all, but we have never seen anyone like this on our land, nor have we ever read about it in ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of amalgama, because those who do not know them by way.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and be truly of almagama:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in third angles.
de la char sor le neis	and of the sword when the need arises.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Never are born or do not have different types of worms, because if there are any, they do not seem to be scorpions at the mouth of piers.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if it has such or if there are worms enhanced in fox color, and if the worms have bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of these worms that are bone colored and do not have enhanced color, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands in front of the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	And she works her nostrils, and pierces the tusk into those charms, and pulls them out.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then try to hold it steady in the subtle crevice of a part, until you feel that the char is entirely free.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there is nothing left to try, then examine all the subtle and light parts of the body, so that it does not cause any harm.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And without causing you to faint, or if there is a sudden pain, if it follows as it should.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it is a malignant faint, then quickly and burn the area until it is not sore and all the charms are free, then gently apply ointment or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the joint does not move, and moisture comes to the palace, it is a sign of health.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	If moisture does not penetrate as it should, signs of damage may be present in the bone, and if the fractures do not heal properly.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore, it is recommended that you cut the end of the thread with a sharp edge, and it should be about the size of your thumb, and between each bone there should be at least one.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And put the sharp end of the thread in the eye, and pull it as far as possible, and move it until the tip reaches the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And many times they make the child go to school, and it is a light thing for him who sees it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes from the left hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and squeeze them one after the other as we who are full.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as long as you see that the noose has corrupted the thread, then cut off the child's penis, clean the wound, and apply Egyptian ointment to it, and then put the ring back on the thigh as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this three times or more, until the ointment has dried out all that is left of the thread.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then place or insert a needle into the skin of any joint as soon as it is healthy, and if it can be used for drying herbs.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and that is the form of the instrument to purge the head, and it is used to distill oils and medicines or other things.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be made of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a needle, and it is led accordingly.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see, if I make a needle closed, and it is the purging oil for the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it is close to the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	and of the sword when the need arises.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times it happens in the head of a man who has a disease called "telly" (a term for a type of brain tumor), and grows and becomes large, as soon as it is seen.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And because of this, you must cut it at the beginning, and then put the burning cauterization or the hot medicine on it.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay cutting it as soon as it becomes large, if it is hard, with a foxed color, and poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if you do not cut it with iron because it is an enchanted wound, because whenever it is cut, there is great pain to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the patient holds their breath, it is not due to fear of pain, and you see that they can hold it, if the helper is experienced and knows how to do it, and cure the limb of things that are dry and constricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the joint is cut and bruised
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long, and this is true in no man's land.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, it is necessary to do this if there is no other remedy, as one can see if the wound is fresh at all times.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then close the lips with a stitch, and treat it as soon as it is safe.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already detached on one side and the other, it is necessary to scrape all the parts of them as they heal, then close the lips with a stitch, and hold it, and sprinkle some dragon's sinew powder, and burn the end.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the poultice is placed on a piece of plaster or another soft plaster that is soaking wet, and it is left until it has dried, then the treatment of ointment is applied as soon as it is dry.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of sewing if you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	Or by needles, as we have said in the belly sewing.
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	Or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	2. of lip sutures
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At the hands of doctors, the corners of the incised abscess are tough, resembling grains of sand, and smaller or larger.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore, you must turn the corners of the incised abscess, and cut them off at each point, and take them with tweezers and glue in each part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then use the lever after incising the vitreous humor, as long as it is not stained.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then use the lever of the ophthalmoscope, and cure the lever with dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the thigh of the knee
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times on the gums are found the old name "albus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If it is necessary that you hold it with your fingers, and the cap at its root, and let go of the bow or the vein.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put on the vitreous humor lever, or other powders restricting and desiccants.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if it returns after incising, and many times it happens, if the cap second time, and cauterize.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If there is no return after the burn.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of stitches with coppers.
des sordens	of the scars
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	No times are assembled at the corner of the teeth, the teeth are placed between the lips, gums that are ugly and rough.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And no time is the black and yellow tooth, until corruption comes to the lip, and it becomes the tooth.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If you must make the patient sit still between your hands, and the head is in your holy place, and the teeth or gums are exposed, as long as it does not cause any harm.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And I make of the black and yellow, and the green and others, as they are seen.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if it is found in the first reasoning, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then resume to read the second chapter and the tie, as long as you have everything ready.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and you should know that the teeth have the ability to be in various forms of dislocations, according to what is shown by the demonstration, because the razor whose edges are used to cut between the teeth has other forms than those shown in the dissections.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others are with you apparent.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay as long as possible until you can, because it should not be hurried.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a high-sulfur substance, therefore there is no excuse for not doing so.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is confined to bed, if you are certain that they have pain, then.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain of the patient has been relieved, and make sure it is not too hot, and make it boil the bone.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And nothing will depart from the pain until the bone is boiled, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are sure of the pain, if it comes that you scorch all over the bone, then shave it as much as possible and protect the genitals of all parts.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then the wound should be sewn to your needs or have small needles inserted at first and then they are firmly fastened. Then the needles should be well anchored.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And let the patient's head be held firmly in your holy hands, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth sharply with forceps, and if it does not break, then take none of these hooks and gently pull out from each side, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the wound is perceived and cleaned, then it may be necessary to wrap it with cloths, wherever the holes are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	And if the extraction is done gently with needles, so that it does not break the extracted part.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it is necessary to wisely cover over the thigh to remove the tooth's root.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you should be very careful not to break it, and there will remain a part, and the patient suffers from the malice of the root, greater pains in the first place.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be careful that you do not harm it in the same way as those who, by their haste and their courage, never break the chariot, and never cause any harm to anyone.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But no one comes to help once by the cough of this great disease, either by the roots that they do not endure, or by the broken part, as we have often wanted.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the wound is bleeding, if you clean the flesh with wine or vinegar and sail,
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if they come out of the blood and enter, which often happens, if you use the flesh of green glass,
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if it does not heal, if it is cauterized.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the stitches, whether they are silent at the first wound, are long and wide and have thick fingers, which do not double when you pull on the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	1. "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they be of large members if they do not break when pulled out, and they be well-made iron, and they be teeth to hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root of the tooth is exposed to the cheek, if you can manage to put it in the cheek butter of the inner side of the jaw for one or two hours, until it is smooth, then the needles that are called "algefri" will be drawn out, and the head of the shoulder will look well.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they are made in the same way as a lime and it is in this form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out through all these pricks, then it comes that you dig out the whole of the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a type of tweezer, and its form is like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And if it is too thin and large if it does not break easily, and if the root jumps from this, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If this does not work, if you use all the means, and if the forms come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two prongs, its form is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And of other forceps that are before in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large thorns, its form is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let it be known that it is not possible to break it, and scissors are needed with sharp teeth.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other bones, which are not so strong.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the masters most skilled use their own instruments, according to what their experience and the disease demonstrate, because they have different teachings on the various instruments, and do not break any chariot or other bones, or cut through them, if they seek the bones that I have said, and I will help you with gestures, as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and grasp.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the patient to the appropriate medicine, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears to not fit according to the natural body, and its form is misshapen, and at the same time in women with pubic hair, if it comes that you must remove the tooth after the dent, and it is not true lest the bone, and one cannot soothe or embrace it:
adonques lou raie;	Therefore, I will reset the dislocation.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like this small tooth, and make it of hard steel:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the force is little by little with the hands years due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be limed, then the liming of a part of the liming as shown here is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it will be as the gnat's leg that we make:
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and with the gnat's leg, very lightly and often in the hands, so it does not move until it chickens:
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the smoothness at the end for all raspers, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, then it is necessary to limn the astringent so that it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	2. When the beak is dislocated.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth in front of the gum, or by percussion or by cheek, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you cure them with restrictive medicines, and this is not effective.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	If the patients are restrained with a gold thread, because the silver threads turn green and slippery, but the gold does not move.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And that the silver threads are neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth erupting, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the diseased teeth, as long as you see signs of growth in the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then the covering resumes just where you left off, and gently and wisely draw your hand subtly, so that it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and make sure your line is at the root of the tooth so that it does not escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then secure the heads of the wires with nails, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth and the tooth to be straightened, and make sure it does not damage the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it until it is as narrow as possible, and if it does not hold, or the wires break, then tighten another wire.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it delays and serves as intended, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the incisor of the two healthy teeth and the two canines, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is lost, if it is replaced in its socket, tightly, as we have said:
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and does not become loose if it is not sharp and sharp, and never takes the form of a bone tooth of a sheep, and it is placed in its socket or where the defect is, and it is tightened as we have said, and stays there, and serves as intended:
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of the copper wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never has been found a tooth that comes out of the tongue or nature, that has not been made:
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	If by chance there is a deep wound.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	And the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth with the scalpel, and the handle remains in your hand, and you hold the tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then cut the nerve as wide as possible, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it snaps or tears, and that is a sign of pain, then cut the other side equally.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And make sure the blade does not go too deep, for the artery is dry.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	And when you are done, if the lip is red and sore, or cold, then place the tongue in a tent of linen.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and the patient's skin is scraped every night, which cannot be soothed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if the blood flow comes, then put on the leu with vitrol and broiled wheat.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if it is not burned, then cauterize at the slow cautery, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then the treatment of another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see that the skin has turned red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is gall.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it declines to blenchor, and it is moist, if it gushes blood, and the skin is made with a subtle sponge, and the discharge is from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if you do not want to cause pain in your work, then use vitrol on the wounds as soon as they are cleaned, and return to your work as soon as you have finished everything.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the shoulder joint and the tendon, and treat other wounds as soon as they are healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	gums of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No time comes when the gums called "godath" come out, and they are properly called the second teeth. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, keep a close watch on them.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is an abscess of hard consistency and small size, and of a pale color, and not touched with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, and it is not touched with iron at all, then for the dislocation of the shoulder.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but it does not leave until it is dead, and therefore it will depart, or it will break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of a greenish color and the root is small, and you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first check if the abscess is closed and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient lie down in the sun, and their head should be in your hands, and they open their mouth and swallow the salve between their hands, and press the tongue evenly all over the instrument, and so is the form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or of gold as some coins:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you press the tongue against all this instrument, and see the aposteme, if you take the oncid and the leaf in the amber, and the thread will be further than you think.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and take no thing with the spots, then lay the cape on the instrument, and see the form which seems some force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and the head is all wrinkled, and one place to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if it is sharp, then the form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be cutting from one part and another part name.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	When you have grasped one of the mandrills, if you grasp the other in the same manner, and after making an incision, heat the sharp, hot barbers' knife, and make it sizzle and sputter, and if the blood comes out, or if burns from pomegranate peels are cooked, or if blisters from mirte leaves are caused, and similar things, as long as they are not extinguished.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the cure is until it is healthy.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And never do any other abscesses appear in the throat than the two mandrills, if they are cut out exactly like the two mandrills.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that it was not dense in the throat, which means it is of little sensation.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had indeed closed most of the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the clogged pipe, and could not eat or drink, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been opened twice by the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I then made a deep incision, and opened the abscess, and took out a large portion of the bowel.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	and then removed another part from another puncture, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After the onion is cut into these slices, and a piece is taken out, it will only yield a drop of blood.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And then the woman's leader was cut off, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting that slice.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the slice was dislocated further and filled the joint that I had emptied, so it refused to move.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore, I engined and cauterized the joint from the girl's mouth.
ensi demora sens croistre;	It did not take long to heal.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I left these parts, and I was only able to do what God willed after me.
de l’uve	Of the urethra
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the urine reaches the urethra, it is thin and long, and is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it becomes too large and round, it is called the "urethra".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the inflammation has subsided, and it is softened, then you can touch it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one that is rounded and not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if it is bloody or of a purple or black color, then you should evacuate the incision from it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For it poses great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is therefore necessary, as you see, according to the method I have described, of the patient's gallbladder and length, that you place the assistant in front of the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we have mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then, the onion is cut in the urethra, and the tail is removed, and the copper is placed in the two incisions that I mentioned in the incision of the two hamstrings.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much, only the excess that is over the natural end.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cut more, you will hurt your voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two thumbs, and treat as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	If the patient has a high fever, then it is necessary that you use an engine for the cauterization of the affected part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is to make it hot and dry.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And the surgeon places the head in your mouth, and then presses the tongue on the instrument we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and confuses with live coal, if it is not too thick or too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and by using this instrument, the form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And if the head has a hair or puts medicine, like the hair of a mouse, and places the instrument in all the medicine on the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	When the patient's shoulder is dislocated, if it causes the saliva to flow and the mucous to drip from the mouth due to the medicine, if it does not descend to the chin and the throat.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the vein, as long as you see it is red and the sting of the medicine is calmed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around no instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and tie the instrument all around the cotton in the vein, as long as the cotton is damp around the vein.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this until it is perfect, then leave it to dry, and it will be ready after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have experience in restarting the fire cautery of medicine, if it restarts, and after the cautery cleanse the excrement around the urethra, wrap it with linen, and clean what is outside of the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have a fever of cold, and treat it with gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This remedy is safer than the incision, only the cautery.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take a lamp, oil, oregano, rosemary, chamomile, and mint, and assemble all or none of them in one pot, and put in ashes, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And it may be well glued with strong earth, and it should have an instrument made according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or gold, and the ends should be placed in the patient's mouth as much as possible until the vapor rises through the canal, as long as the canal is saturated;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the wound has healed, as long as the canal is dry, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, because many things may come;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and only do this if it is necessary for the onset of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	If this instrument is not present, then take a needle and make a hole in the cheek with it, if the mouth of the patient has not been too much bitten.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the needle's hole does not cause pain in the mouth, and it is a good cure together with the previous one.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times have I seen bones protrude from the throat or fish spines, or nothing at all.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore, if you must see what you see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments, so that you can see the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And if it does not open at all and is stuck in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance, if the thing is achieved through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of millet, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and it attaches to the sponge thread, and then glues together;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches the shoulder, if it sticks, and then it will be torn off;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come off from this, if we use the instrument of pulling according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be corbes at the head if it can more lightly enter the mouth, and have the head lifted up;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And if you do not touch the epiphysis, all will not live, and will not burden the bones too much.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is better that the patient uses the instrument, because it is needed or the thing is there.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the use is good, or he takes it further all the instrument correctly, as far as it goes.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's loose skin
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No time is wasted in medicine, if I have said it in the division, by the treatment of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when it does not profit anything, then look in the eye of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument I have given you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the shoulder, if the bone is all in one piece, or if it has thin hairs that are worth nothing in this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth anything, then take a hair from the head of a woman, and tie it around the neck of the patient, and then pull or cut off the hair, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's scalp is sweating all the time.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then fill your mouth with cold water, and feel the saliva, and it often moves to your hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And if the tongue feels the cold water, then stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not stop when we have said, and if the helper smokes asafetida on the instrument we mentioned in the irrigation of the eye;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, because it feels like it is burning.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the irrigation is if you preheat it or if there are charcoal bits, and it should be covered with a covering perch in the environment, and in the other end it should be the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you gargle with the fumigation, and the patient places the head of the chain in their mouth, closes their mouth so that the smoke does not enter, but it comes out through the nose.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the patient will sneeze, and if it happens again several times, the fumigation is repeated.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And the patient suffers from thirst, and drinks salty and bitter things, and does not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And therefore, the patient endures this treatment as ordered.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument used to treat the nose, if it is, when it can be seen, resembles combs that may enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it seems like the beak of a surgeon, and it has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot hold on.
et vez ci la forme:	and then comes the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of the sutures
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	The forms of apothegms are, according to what the remembrance comes after another in this book, and they are different in piercing and size.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways that one is itself in its appearance, and because it has moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is if the limbs are lying down or at rest.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the head of the chief is different from that of the foundation, and the head of the lower limb is different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if in apothegms one does not have to cut deeply, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	If there are those who think they can discern when they should die, and do not die according to their completion, as amputations that are defective joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when the head comes from difficult joints, and it is left as long as it is dry, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	If the amputation is defective, it is due to the principal limb, and if you delay the incision until the limb is dead, it will harm the principal limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	If the foundation is defective, if the incision is not made when the limb is dead, it will harm the foundation.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is only necessary to make the amputation when the limb is dead, as if the foundation is defective, it will not be able to pass through, and the wound will be long, and a fistula will form.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot be cured in a great amount of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you cut off the ear of the aposteme wound which bleeds according to the completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the fever subsides, and the relief of pain and bruising, and the debate and aguishness of the aposteme, and the other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary that you cut off the hole of the aposteme wound which is more dependent on the ear, and where it has opened.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And if the hole of the aposteme wound is long and deep, and it opens with the hands or fingers, or in the joints and arteries, and in all of them equally or not, without any bleeding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that are pricked, according to the pain of the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is formed in the member, if it is painful, then you should leave the puncture until it is confirmed to be well digested, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	If you do not follow this instruction, I will have to stop translating the text.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance they harden the lips and make them appear more beautiful.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is felt according to the pain of the member, then it should be left according to the size of the blood.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must cut out small abscesses, small pustules.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large pustules, and multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cut out the head, and close it.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When I have become so old as I am now, and I am weary, then it is necessary to do it in the same way as they make bubbles.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	If it is of those that are cut at three angles, and if it is of those that are cut like the thorn of a mirror, as well as those that are cut like the thumbs.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	If it is of those that are cut into a specific size, and other sizes and appearances are coped with.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, if it is like a superficial wound, you must cut it through gradually.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the wound is large, and it has a great bowel, and you cut it, if you do not dig out all of the bowel in that hour, but dig out a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then comes the aposteme (stitch) to the other side, then no right thing is done.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times with great care, until the bowel is all.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Meanwhile, if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying, or pregnant women, or old men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectoration there is no time with the issue of the bowel, that by chance dies the patient, and you do not blame yourself.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have found your stitch, if the wound is bleeding, look at whether the wound of the suture is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a flat measuring, then use threads of linen or cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	If it is many abscesses, and there is fever, then it comes that you make a tent in each one so that they do not fight against each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	If you have opened an abscess partly in leather, and it is healed, then it comes that you fill it with fine cloth or rough linen, and the limb will be better;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone, and the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the evacuation of blood comes to your vein, if it is cold and wet, and the arm hangs down, and you gently put it on the bed many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the patient has lost much blood, and there is no relief, and the government and treatment are not effective, and the powders that I have said in my hands in this book, and if there is pain, and the abscess is nervous, then it comes that you make tents and fold the softened cloth in wine and olive oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	If this is the case, and the leus is charnus, then it comes to pass that you must moisten your cloths in cold water and oil, or in wine and oil vinegar, just as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove the abscess and pus, if it comes to pass, as soon as it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it comes to pass that you understand completely in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or do I say what you must go before the treatment of abscesses and then this chapter?
des soros	of sore
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the head of the shoulder comes to many abscesses, and they are like ours, as if the thread of a grapevine, and there are some that seem like this.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	It is either too fat or too wet, or both like pouls.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And if there are those who are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt that the patient will not bleed, then it does not matter.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the measurements of the size if it is that you prove to all the instruments that are called "entromising," by which form comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make it longer by adding more.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is seen, then shave off the hair that contains the moisture, because it will return to its original position as soon as it is left alone.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, use vinegar and linen, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and keep the part that is more painful at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then resume the thread, as before, the second day, and the pain, so long as you feel well but it does not last all night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment according to the appropriate method, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds fat, and the grip is according to this form, then it will be long.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And you gnaw your bones, and scrape off all parts, and use all your care to draw out the pimple or it will gout.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery is opposite, as I said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if the abscess is large, and it is cut and cured as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And it measures the incision for the abscess and the wound, if it is more flexible, because there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or heads, and these were not from the mouth of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess to be like a sharp, rough, and bloody piercing, that could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if none was made, it was as if a wound had been made like a piercing;
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that come, the opening should be made as far down as possible at the base of the ear, to ease the bowels;
et les cure si com il covient.	and they are cured as it is possible.
des scrophules	The first sentence to translate is "des scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often, the wound of the abscess is at the collarbone, and the stitches come out, and the skin becomes inflamed, and never once do they go to another part or close, and they become infected, and one bone is connected to another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each wart is properly located on its side, just like the knuckle and the tip of the finger that we have mentioned.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the appearances of these warts are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	It has tissues that contain moisture, and it has malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in the one that you see with good arrangement on the skin, and is similar to the color of the heart, and uniform in all parts and not rough as nerves of the artery or conductor, and is not rough.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if you must cut it with a knife, and burn in every part, and the two lips of the ear are hard like bones, if you can bear it, just as we have said about the fingertip.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And the thread is cut little by little, and be sure you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not tear it, that your hands do not slip, and do not cut too soon, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol or some powders that stay in place, and draw the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the swelling subsides, and the wound is softened, and dress it.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood comes out, if you return to your work, as soon as you have finished it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then wonder if your index finger is tired if it has a few small scabs, if the nails and the cuticles.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if the cause of the scab is deep, then you must only cut off that scab at its root, but leave a strong double thread, and let it hang there without causing any harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then use the wound of thin cotton to dip in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, if you manage to bring together the two lips of the wound, and hold them now, then there will be no excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and dig further, and cut as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scabs that hold excess skin, pierce them or make them wider.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce them like the one mentioned before, depending on the size, then apply ointments and similar things, if it prevents further corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well-dressed, if the treatment of ointment involves charring, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the shoulder
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke and talked about the size of the neck.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I have never seen anyone who does this in our world, and it is their scripture of speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	To those who have squinting, it is necessary that the neck called "epiglotis" be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And if one cannot help in this way, because all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those who have aphonia in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the lungs.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to close the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it with three or four small incisions, passing through the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut, not touching the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and they say that if it is possible to cut the epigastrium without causing any harm, and the vessels are not cut, then it is not dangerous;
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the masters are unable, then it is necessary that the jawbone extends to the entire neck, then cut the cheek as far as it reaches to the chin;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid the veins of blood, if you see nothing, and then apply leeches, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the swelling of the shoulder that was forced to move by the broken arm and due to the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound over the bone.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed, if there is doubt about the dislocation, gather the two lips of the wound as much as possible, and cover it all so that you feel the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that make the wound heal quickly, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not do anything until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is near death, and the lack of air is fatal.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, one should address the epigastrium because the patient cannot breathe, and they die through the wound.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And they command the ancients to leave the wound oversized until the malady of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. Therefore, they command to stitch the wound and treat it, as soon as it is treated.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I see a maiden who is being cut, and she has a piece of cloth in her throat, and part of her clothing is torn.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I am called to heal, and I found it as if it were death.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and I find the blood that came out of it, and though she had no veins or it led further than just the throat, it was due to the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and examined the wound, and cured it as soon as it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and did not reach the damsel until she was red with shame, and returned afterwards to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I said that in the cutting of the epiploon there is no pain.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large mouth
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This hernia is called "hernia of the neck," and it are some large hernias in the color of a thread, and it are much in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	and there are in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	The natural world and accidents.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Nature has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	Accidents occur in two ways: either they resemble large animals, and the other way is similar to an apoplexy that comes from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And if there is pain, and it is not possible to overcome it, then it is better to seek help from the physician who is small, and he will prove and search throughout the introducer.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you also find it as large as the fat one, and cannot be moved, then the case is like when we move the animals, and we cut through all its parts, if it has none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and pierce it well, and the cure is done as it should be, until it is completely healthy.
des nous	The first sentence to translate is
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of us, and I will tell you all the appearances.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I know the entire difference between the born and the issued.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that issue is childbirth and fever, as long as the ebullitions are passed, and it is completed with the diarrhea.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	but the fever and the labor rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the newborn there is no labor pain or fever or pain, and it contains I sweat, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the cold heart, and it begins thus like a lump, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	1. "And they are according to two appearances, either rough or wet, and of different colors as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the newborn, that you examine and first look at all the instrument called "dislocating" according to what the form brings out or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	1. "The manner of incising the abscesses in our members is whether you prick more or less than you do in the abscess, and turn your two points again and again until you feel that the cuscus has perceived the keur, then that it is according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	1. "Then pull out the forceps, and hold tight as you jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	1. "If the wetting occurs, it will have that color, just like with other abscesses as I said.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	After the scalpel is cleaned, it is not moistened, if it is, then make it thick, and take it with pincers, and gently scrape each part of it and make sure the handle is clean with the nut.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you do not pull it cleanly, then take it in pieces so that nothing comes out.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing comes out, it will return to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it demands a piece, and it does not hurt you, then use the wound of some corrosive powders, close the wound, and apply soothing ointments to the wound, and cure other wounds as long as they are healthy.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it is large, if it covers the two lips of the wound, and the care of him who enjoys char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	If the vein is battered and it is contrary or otherwise, if you hasten and use the lees of vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound presses, and rests the inflammation of blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to copper that which is due to the lack of out.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See these forms of the entangled stools, and are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	Large, moist, and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And they are divided into three kinds: large, moist, and small. And there are three kinds: large, moist, and small.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils sont lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	They are as sharp as the beaks of birds of prey, and are made of gold, silver, or iron, and are more easily bent yellow, and are more difficult to bend black to fit the corners of fistulas.
et sont de III manieres:	They come in three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the purulence of the abscess.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the claws are quite similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if the claws have two holes of three kinds:
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	If those who have three squirels, and are of three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	And if those who have two squirels, and squirels of one kind only, and are of three kinds.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And this is necessary in their limbs.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these we make sharp, and of such they are that which does not cut as deep as one would like, because we do not harm the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these introducers, the amputations are returned in hand, so that the patient does not escape from the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	1. The dislocations occur in three ways.
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	2. They are either large, small, or misplaced, as you will see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	3. But only in the shoulder and leg, like hams, arms, and shoulders, and hands, and in similar parts;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	4. And no other instrument is ever used, which resembles the forceps, according to this form, and one does not draw blood;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed on none of the times to the shoulder that it can withstand the pressure of the veins and the arteries, and never returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	5. And no other men's thighs swell when they are trying to straighten them, as if they were female thighs;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	6. And some are lame and swollen, and those who see them heal according to this form of this line, from .b. to .g.;
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scorch the fat, and then use the surgical wound with a heated iron, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it until it is healthy.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if it is crooked, and is straightened as much as possible, and if it is inserted into the skin, then it should be done in two places, according to the similarity of wounds.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	If one end is held by the other at the end of each, then the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, and this line.b. jusc'a the line.g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scorch the leather that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and do what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	If it is not healed, or the incision is not completely finished, because the patient does not rest, or due to the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with clean, moist gauze in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the dressing is soaked in sweat and grease, then change it as soon as it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest chap
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Car en l'ovraige de cest chapitre, il y a souvent une évacuation de sang lorsque on ouvre une vaisseau sanguin, et incise une abscèse, et traitre des plaies, et extraire des arrow, et coupe des pierres, et des choses similaires. Où il y a doute et peur, et de nombreuses mort
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Il est donc important que le docteur soit précautionneux lorsqu'il fait la réposition d'une dislocation de la poitrine ou de l'épaule, car il peut causer de graves dommages si il n'est pas effectué correctement.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si toute la bouteille qui est en l'apostème est vuidie, il est recommandé d'utiliser une plaie de cuir pour enlever le reste du liquide et de laisser les cotonnes jusqu'à ce que la bouteille soit complètement saine.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	When the abscess resembles scabs, if it is as we have said in scales, and the wound bleeds, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is injured, and the skin is cut, if there are many abscesses, and also the vein is exposed and infected.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if it is by the artery, then it is cut long and even.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	When you feel your pain, if you feel strain;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when it is by the vein, if we are put aside apart;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to cope with this abscess, and at the same time when it is loose the bands and the grips and the knots and the eyes and out of others, and it is great pain;
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the care of iron, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is filled with arteries made by cutting through the skin long;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work the size of the bones, and then beautifully cut the arteries of the feet, until it is discovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then, apply a needle, and perceive just on the other side, and draw the artery with a double thread of about two fingers, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then, do not move the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as long as it is not freed, and let the abscess be opened.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then, perform the cure while the bone is not yet hardened, as long as the wounds are fresh.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then, treat this part with the appropriate ointment, as soon as it is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the patient holds their breath, it is because of the size of the vein, so if you must grip your hand with what you have in the abscess all around the limb, then pull out the needle that you hold in your hand and feel, and if it feels tight, then draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then close the incision, as I have told you, or from one of the two ends of the two fillets.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the threads will not come out, then pull out another needle through all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then pull the stitch as much as the excess in the thread, then pull the excess of the gut and leave what is left.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then wash it with vinegar and oil, then treat it with tents and bandages as much as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with assistants and you must and in all places where there are joints, and it is the suture, and its color seems like the color of the heart, and it is in more dispositions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is tightened, if it feels pain, and it is not much from the heart, but from the gut.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	1. It remains silent about all parts, and does not go before being held, nor does it come undone, and the one who is in joints cannot be held by copper.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	2. By chance, there is contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	3. And the one who is at the head or front, makes the leather at the spatulate.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	4. If the abscess is small, then it should be held with nails and the cloth in its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	5. If it is large, then the spongy bone should be spent and burned, then the bone and assemble the wound to its former state, and the cure is done when it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large tongs hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	There is no occasion in the womb and does not affect any other part, and it is a disease called "fuction" due to its appearance of "aus", and it has a subtle root, and the head is large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and in some it are few and in others many.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	I have seen one woman who had it in her belly which was more like "funks" than anything else, and it had no difference, and they were white, had a thin root, and were sharp, and they rotted away due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six. If you look at the flesh, it is wet, and the color of the root is pale and wet and of a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the head is at the widest part of the pelvis, and they are in your presence, they undergo a fire cauterization.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For cutting, there are often too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not want to die, then cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient is bleeding and unconscious from the incision, take a piece of cloth well made, and tie it around the wound as we have said, and leave him alone.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	And then restrain, and do not stop tightening the cloth around the wound until the wound stops bleeding, and then check the patient's sensation.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, if it is not painful in the belly, but if you press well on the other side, then burn it so it does not re-emerge.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and do not press on the thigh that is of a different color, rough texture, and poor sensation, and lame.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted galls, and I will come to the cure of this chancre afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture,
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the bowel comes from cauterization of a wound or a burn of scar tissue, and is under the belly and has some of the feces, as it does in other cases, or of sacs that cut through veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of ventosity.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is by the rupture of the suture and from the exit of the bowel, if the color of the aposteme resembles the color of the heart, and it is light and causes pain in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	1. And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, it returns, and by chance if it stretches, it enlarges the opening to the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is light and easy to press, and it opens well when you press with your hand; do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, if it opens by these signs, the aposteme is large and hard, and it is flicked according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to varicosity, if it is swollen at the tip, and the patient appears to be due to arterial or veinal sanguination, or varicity.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it comes to pass that you let the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is from the intestine or the anus, then it comes that you instruct the patient to touch his tail, and it should be extended all around, then draw out all of the feces.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command the patient to squeeze between your hands, then draw out the entire limb that you have indicated with all of your strength, then the half of the abscess is at the end of the great sciatic nerve.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then draw out the entire limb with a strong thread or a tight cord, and it should be free from all knots.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work the half of the abscess extended on the thread, and it should be your index finger, and you will feel the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you catch the hemorrhage early, if it disappears, and cut into the intestine near the stomach.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you catch the diarrhea early, if it reaches the bladder, and cut into the urethra to remove excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery is reversed or the vein, if it goes against the element, then return to your work and take two hooks, and cut off the testicles, and cut off the testicles in the same way you think you are doing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then drain the abscess with four hooks, and if you see, take out the hooks, and leave the leg as it was before it started to bleed, and let the dead part die on its own.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	If you catch it when it is subtle and permeates, then the treatment of what must be done, and cover the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the joint of what must be done, and dry the joint.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division of the appearances of the gumboil, and it is commented that one must cover with medicines, and it is commented that the cure of iron must be done.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And let us say that the gumboil is caused by the marriage, and great caution in its cure, and they tell the old one that when gumboli are in the joint or can be raised if like gumboli which are in the mammary glands, in the incision, and in similar cases, and it must be done entirely when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, if you can only approach it, for I have never seen a cure.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Not a single one has ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in its place or can be moved, is that you have never purged any black mud from the cauterant.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make it healthier if there is clear swelling, then cut the cauterant and put it in the leg to do the work.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then your shoulder bones or joint, and all the hair falls off, and the bone leaves nothing behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow out completely, and press well on the wound with your hand or nothing, and if the dislocations make the blood flow against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize as much as it is not squeezed.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of another treatment until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division of the appearances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by fire.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only elected.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch iron in these two appearances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a fatal thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore, when you treat ydropisie, also called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not work, look at whether the patient's condition is weak, or if there is another disease than ydropisie, if like all other solutions of the stomach and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if not touching iron, for it has doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient of great vigor, and he has no other disease than ydropisie only, and he is not too young nor too old, then you should over:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	1. Gently hold the patient's shoulder with your hands, and press their belly firmly at the lowest part of the ribcage, then take the spatula with the spikes in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And now, let us proceed with the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	2. and it should not be sharp if it enters but only if it comes to the intestine when it is picked up, and it cannot be cut:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	3. then look if the dislocation is towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	4. if it is necessary to cut through the abdomen, do so directly above the point where the needle was inserted:
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	5. and if the dislocation is due to disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the left side of the abdomen:
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	If it is by the mucous membrane, if it is on the left side, and only the surgeon should guide the knife along the incision that the superfluities do not flow onto the weak part of the body.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then cut through all the hair with the instrument, and the skin, and lighten your hand on all the surrounding area between the hair and the skin as if you were scraping off a piece of nail or an entree.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then cut through the skin as far as the surrounding area reaches the bone, and it is the axe that you use, then pull out the instrument, and it is the form of this one that you should know.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a silver snake, and is light or feathery in texture, and in the part of the small pore,
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and or costs on another part, third pore;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and on another part, and on the first;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is cut like a quill, and is the form of the incision that the scribes make for the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the head of us, it is the allemande, so that when they strike it with the edge, now it goes under the instrument:
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	If you see the wound more than it should be in that hour, by chance if the surgeon dies from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he has cold hands, or he approaches to death:
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But according to the quantity of her virtue, and according to the arrangements of her virtue in the maid's body, and her soul.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then draw out the instrument and hold the wick, and it is held now by the steam that is smoking the hole that was made under the scar, according to what I have spoken, that you must do according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then continue the instrument the next day, if you see the maid suffering from this, and dip a little bit of wick.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this no day, and keep yourself from hurting as much as you can but a little bit of wick.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the patient's condition, and you allow them to drink water, if the cure of the grave or sand bath is done, and by means of washing or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes flushed;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the use of desiccating medicines as long as they are healthy, and cauterization on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the fever, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the tooth
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is ever born without having a fever in the tooth, or if the fever is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is too much to perceive at all, not even with the most delicate sensation, according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then place or insert a small pin under the skin, and tie and cut the thread after three or four days, if it is seen to make urine, if it is closed, and make urine, and then put it back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance they do not cover, because the urine that comes out is not closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the catheter is small, if it is treated with a tight clot, as we have said, if it stretches.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the knowledge of cutting in their chest are weak, because no child is born with the umbilical cord at the top of the thigh, because they cannot piss before they cut the cord.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot deliver because the matter does not come out in time, and this is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the operation is that if the midwife sees something moving on her back, it is the umbilical cord and the loop is as big as a feather, if the child is born in pain, so it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the patient from losing consciousness due to pain that often comes, and if it does, and the wound is clean, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	2. of the pustules of the scalpel
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often come cold winds in the neck region, and it appears to be a bad appearance;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and in some it is malignant and in others not malignant;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	If you are to burn them at the subcutaneous tissue, and cut and clean all of them, then put soft cotton in an Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of the ointment is done as soon as it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of putrid color and large size, then it comes that you will need cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and the wound is clean, and it has part of the hair and part of the skin, if you must cut off the part that has the hair,
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is healed, if the skin is whole.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you close the wound together, if you do not secure the head of the hair that it is not seen, and there comes darkness and corruption in the hair of the wound and out.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If all that is black and corrupt comes out, then put on the plaster of honey and flour which is made of the scraps of roasted peas and vines, then other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood is drawn, then follow this form of the moon cauterization:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The fire cautery, if used correctly, can help in these ways:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	It is knowledge, at the drainage of blood, and in the corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, then it comes to pass that you bind or lead the shoulder with a cord, and the physician pierces it with a needle, and the patient suffers pain.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the hair of the shoulder arrives at those who have not been circumcised, or have had a wound or an abscess, then it comes to pass that you scarify it with the instrument, as long as the roots are loose, and are released from the shoulder of the shoulder in all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a difficult thing to do, then it is necessary to shave the area without any hair of the beard and the mustache.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then apply a layer of soft linen cloth dampened with cold water, so it does not stick.
de la circoncision	Of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a continuation of scars like the others;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	When we perform this work of our own will, and in the best way possible, as it is our duty to do for the benefit of our children, and the lighter for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not call circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I want the greatest part of the masters and doctors who perform circumcision inside the day, with force, and on all occasions.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it happens that the curtain is broken, and it has two threads, and by chance it catches on something and breaks more of it, then it will be even worse.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or they are recovered quickly, and there is great pain, and the wound is not securely closed, which is why there is severe pain in the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And during the healing of the finger, by chance the iron escapes and cuts the wound, and it opens many times and there is no healing and I want to see it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the circumcision which is made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment because the forces cut both sides of the thread equally as well as without it.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if it measures evenly in I, then you hold all of it.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread is well stretched over the leather.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And so the manner of the first opening if you think the child understands, that you do not tie the thread too tightly only, and then I will loosen it in all the ways you please.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then I will tie it all right in your hands, and place the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see, and no one of the threads.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then put your hand on the bone and blow or suck, and draw it up as much as the head of the bone is in.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then clean well the assembly of the waste, then tie the head of the bone with a double thread, then tie it opposite to the other line.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And the tie you need for the second reading in the pouch and the index, pass between the two loops, then gently lift the handle at high speed and pull the head of the nail.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then leave the blood pouch alone, as it is the most difficult.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And sprinkle powder on it and on the powder, with a damp piece of cooked beef, cut into thin slices and marinated in olive oil and vinegar, and let it sit for a day, and treat it again until it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces at worlding if this is:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The head of the shoulder is dislocated, and it cannot stay in place. It should be reset as soon as possible.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of mutilation occurs if the edges escape through the incision.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must extend the wound to your finger, otherwise it will result in gangrene.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And it should be held correctly, and if you do not hold it with your finger, then the wound will be lost, and then the cope.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if the wounds persist for three days, and the surrounding area is swollen, then it should be left alone until gangrene occurs, and then it should be lightly burned.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If the cautery is as you see it, and you hold it from the part of the ginger, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat the shoulder with things made of sour powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if it cope well enough, it will be cured, otherwise it will not work.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the shoulder as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine if it is from opalescent wounds, or scabs, or bowels, or gallstones, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra which is either at the top or bottom of the bladder, then it comes that the patient's pain is caused by the catheter being placed on his groins.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And the catheter is placed on the side of the belly, and the abdomen is extended from the part below the back, and the patient's pain is reduced as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And therefore the bladder is constrained to express the urethra at the bottom, because the urine is discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction of all the instrument called "siringue", and its form is like this:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let silver thin hair be like the tail of a squirrel.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the leash of a long and half palm tree be thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the urine's issue if it is that you take a double thread, and tie at the end of the wool or linen, and cut the end of the thread with the snare of the ingerence.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the excess of the wool and cut the end of the ingerence, then anoint the ingerence with oil or burr and urine of beef, and make the patient sit on the seat, and the woman's vessel and the verge moist with olive oil and olive oil and German tincture.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then lightly place the thread at the edge, as it reaches the root of the edge, then double the edge towards the side of the bulge.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then pull the thread before it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient's pain coming from the empty thing, and this is done according to this order because either the conductor or the one who will be guided is turned.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then the thread is all over the hair, and the urine follows the hair, then I take it further, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the thread as soon as the bladder is empty, and alleviate the patient's pain.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are scorching or bloody discharges in the bladder, or when an abscess is formed and you see water and medicines distilling, then use all the instrument called "cathoscopy", and it is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	She is closed, and if there is III pulsation:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	On one hand, and on the other, if you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the wound is read by the physician, who knows it is well healed without addition, if we can treat the moisture, and bind as soon as possible;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medicines running in the uterus, place the head of the steel needle in the moisture, and withdraw it at the point where it is;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw the moisture with the steel needle, and then tightly bind the point where it is;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters the uterus, and comes to the uterus now, if it feels the pain;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And it is the form of a delicate caustic whose use is to scarify the uterus.
si est ci:	If it is, then:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or lead, and it is the head above.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and does not adhere to the skin or the flesh.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and apply the moisture that you have used to scarify the uterus, then place it between the two breasts to form a double-layered poultice, and heat the moisture over the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then cut the head of the caustic along the edge, then squeeze your hand over the uterus with all the moisture that comes out, as long as the patient feels that the moisture is entering the uterus.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a gauze, then take a piece of linen, and make a circle, and pierce it around the hole.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert a strong thread in these wounds, then assemble the circle as we do with a nail, and put oil, sweat, and vinegar on it, and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done with the gauze, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the gauze.
de la piere	From the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the division of wounds, and in assembling remedies.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I said the difference between a piercing and an incision, and the signs, and in what size we must over it.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the vulva.
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the wound which is dislocated in the bladder often occurs in children, and it is a sign that the inflammation of the bladder is becoming more acute.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and if it is opened, and the vulva is grated, and it can be done many times, and then it becomes inflamed.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the end of these wounds, they become infected.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the cure is light for children until they are four years old, and it is grievous in the winter, and it is much more so in the spring, for those who are between winter and spring.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the cure is less severe for those with large incisions than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if we cover the patient with cloths dipped in cold water, we must cleanse all the insides.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never closes the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the shoulders and stand up, and move to the side, if the incision descends to the front of the bladder, and does not once reach the top of the leg.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then place the patient between your hands in a comfortable position, and your hands should be above their knees, if the bladder is entirely tilted downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then gently and carefully touch it.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the incision in the spaciousness, then cut it now at the incision.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if she does not feel any pain when touched, if your index finger is oiled with oil from the left hand, or if it is dry, if the other fingers are well-oiled.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and the wound in its foundation, and want to pierce it, and when you feel with your finger at the top of the vagina.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press with your finger, and the wound should be in the direction that you see it is cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the vagina with his hand, and he commands that he extends with his right hand the curls at the top, and with his left hand to grasp the hair that is loose at the part where the cut is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he cuts the stump coping, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And they make between those who are between the corners and the foundation, not with a mill but at the side of the right shoulder.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And it should be above the incision, and the stitches should be either at the foundation or below, and the size should be large enough so that it covers the wound as much as possible, and should not be too tight.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the pressure if it is at the foundation, which will jump further during work.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and you should check if it has part of the incision or angle, and margins.
si est griés a issir;	If it is cold outside.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if the part that is wet appears as a glowing, and moves, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	If it has angles and margins, make the size larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not hold, then you must pull on the nails that are as sharp as a needle in the head, so that the piercing does not slip.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	Or if you break the delicate instrument pointed at the head.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you do not break it in time, then the wound will widen and if it is not cracked, then pull on it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more piercings, if the largest one is at the top of the vagina, then cut it off, then pull it out, and the small ones afterward, if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is not treated promptly, it can lead to a large wound and further injury.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things come to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or the urine comes out without being able to close it;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but you should try to draw it out, or use tweezers to remove the hairs, as long as you draw it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, if you use the wound of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and draw it out, and then put on soft cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to ease the post-extraction soreness;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then the patient tilts his head, and does not loosen the knot of the thread.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you dislocate it, if the joint is well oiled with oil and sage, then the cure of ointment dyefacient and basilic ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if the abscess comes in the wound and corrosions, and the blood is blocked in the vein, and it is held by the urine, which is in a similar way that without jumping with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Bites that are deep into the wound, and remove the pus, because if it remains, it will cause the vein to rupture, and bleed.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cleanse the wound with warm water and salt, and aid it in every way that you know, as long as it is healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you lie the thighs, and gather the medicines on the leg.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the piercing is small, and it is directed by the bone, and it is not broken, and the urine cannot be discharged.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the treatment of what I say does not satisfy you, that you cut it many times, is an excuse for the size of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already done that.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Prepare to forge according to this form and make it at a third angle, one ton.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take the file and pull the ligature around the edge of the wound, so that it does not get caught in the vein.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then lightly cut the wood along the edge of the wound, until it reaches the piercing.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the wood in your hand at the piercing, as much as you can, until you feel the other side of the piercing.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If a lot of urine comes out, then press your hand on the part that is being pulled away from the piercing that is being loosened by the edge.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks, and it falls with the urine, and it causes pain to the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you do not do this for any reason, if the child's leg is not cut and the other is, then they make a groove between the two limbs, then the stitch is taken out, and the sewn-up wire is removed, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care for it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the piercing of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Only one piercing should be made in women, and if there is none at all, if the care is grievous and defended by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that by chance the woman is virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a well-behaved woman who has been deceived by mirrors, even when she is young;
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third method, if by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth method, if by chance the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it requires a more profound size. And if you must dismember, then choose a skilled hand and cut along the vein, and if you cannot find one, then use a subtle knife.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	This is a wise practice in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command of the examination of the wound.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look well, see if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	and then it is necessary to set the bone or the nail and prick the hole;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she is tight, then the bone is loosened and she should set her bone or the nail with the helper, and she should press and hold her left hand on the vagina;
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	if she is tight, then it is necessary to loosen her bone so that she can move it slightly from the entrance of the vagina until she reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then, press on the hole in the thigh at the root of the thigh against the soft tissue, where it is most painful, and feel the hole in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move his shoulder away from the incision or socket, and it should be the first small one.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then cut the skin in that size, if you feel the wound is deep enough that the hole can come out further, and consider that many methods of holes are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and rounded, and which have veins:
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you want to know the appearance to know the end.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if it is not sharp, if you put vitriol on the bone, and hold it for an hour until it is not burned:
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the hole is out, and have stitches that I told you in the extraction of the hole to help you in your work:
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if it is not set without pain, and that is the artery that is cut, if one puts powder on the shoulder and stretches it tightly and does not continue this, and leaves the wound and does not touch it, by chance the patient will die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is eased, and it is read, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is healing.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia caruncle
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Wet is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white soap, which contains the urine of the beast.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And is called "soap" and has never been properly in the urine of the beast, if one cares that it is another animal's urine.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And that is the flesh between the white smoke that we have spoken of.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And there was nothing else.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this sweat is due to the lack of it coming from the bladder, and it is expanded that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it come from percussion on the flesh, and this moisture is of many colors.
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	Or it is flushed, or without red, or black, or white water, and it comes more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And this is the sign to assemble it, for if it is white smoke that we have spoken of, and the wounds are long as we have said, and it does not open the flesh, for it is moist throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	If it is moist in its own cloth, and the abscess is closed with a part of the bladder, and because they think it is other ointments.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the hide of the thighs and the white ointment, and it is felt well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you see the color of the moisture, if you press on all the introducer, with what form it is before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge whether it is dependent or independent.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cauterize by fire, if it comes that the patient is healthy according to what could be and the fullness of his chest.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then the sowing on his back, with something high, and then put him to sleep with clothes.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	If the patient feels pain on their side, and commands the attendant to pull to the other side, extend the finger at one of the two ribs closest to the knee.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, and cut the tendon between the two long ribs until you reach the point of the finger, and make sure your fingers are straight and facing upwards, marking the tendon with white fat, and scrape it gently so as not to cause pain.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white fat with a sharp needle at the large opening, remove all the fat, and then put your shoulders, and stretch the white fat.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the curvature of the bones, but only the sutures.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Coping all or by pieces at once the costal cartilage of him, if you do not know how to do it well, then it will return the ague.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the head falls on your shoulder, then reset it in the shoulder as soon as you have completed the operation on the suture.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then assemble the two halves of the curvature of the bones with a suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the head corrupted by another disease, then cut the veins that are suspended, doubting the dislocation of the sutures.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then pull the ring on all the suspensors, and remove the nail, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And when it is healed, it is assembled in two parts, which are the branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you pull the other part as you did the first dislocation, then put the blood in the wound, and put fine oil on it;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another fine linen on vine and oil, and put it on the two suspensors, and doubled strips of cloth, and tie it to all the part that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take the strips, and use the lace made according to this appearance and are assembled by sewing on the waist of the braies, and one of the heads is pricked at the back, and the other at the part that is pointed;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two heads are situated on the other two sides, and all the restriction is restricted in the loop of the bow.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And no time is there for this fire cautery in the sharpness of the leather, and it is that you use the subtle cautery cultell, and cut the hair of the fingers, and it should be washed as we have said, if the white fluid that contains the ague is discovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white fluid with the bones, and burn at this subtle cautery cultell.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in all the ways you can think of, as long as you are careful with everything.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and keep the testicles from being touched by the hand
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and consider this work to be more beneficial;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and keeps away from evacuation of blood, and makes sure the size is correct;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing else causes harm, such as an abscess or evacuation of blood, or anything else, then treat what is causing the harm according to what has been said;
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is not strong, and does not want to wait for this work because of its horrible nature, then if there is perforation, as I have said, and you are sure about the meanings we have said that the head of the shoulder is the first to be set, then place the patient on their side;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Because the aposteme is at the end of the part of the bone that is large for all the cartilage, and the perforation is long and narrow.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And if the perforations are wide, then all the wounds will heal quickly.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place gauze on the wound, tie it tightly, and let the wound heal as long as the wound is healthy;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the boil pus comes out of the wound in the mouth of the wound, then you must cut off a needle or the instrument used to treat the abscess, because it forms like this in front;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And enlarge the wound, and sharpen the edges that return, and it will be assembled after six months or more, and when it is assembled, as before, and then the patient will endure the pain of the joints.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the boils
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Sharpen the edges of this ramification in several ways, because it seems to me that you should leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say that all abscesses come from corruption and also from cold.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is for the most part true.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to be known by excessive sweet and acrid humor, which is expanded by cold or by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the suture according to the color of the corpse.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And there is no pain, and the suture is grievous.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance, some sutures are grievous and painful, of a strange color, and no veins or arteries are ever found.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, then it is known by the arrangement of the suture, when you press on it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is necessary that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is made of veins is known by its arrangement in expression, and can be quite well made according to this shape, and according to the others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And when you catch the head of the shoulder, then it is the hip that moves up, and the arm is pushed down with white sugar, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the hip.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the hip is already swollen with these charms, then it is necessary to draw the hip, and catch the shoulder.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is stuck with sugar, or in the veins that are dilated, then it is necessary to deliver all of this, and the shoulder catches up again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is from below, and it is stuck, and you manage to free it all, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, if you use the smooth woolen wound with oil of rose and wine, then apply other cures as needed until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	These are some abscesses enveloped in an envelope similar to the bog, with the softening of the joints, and the patient groans as it goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is well-presented and effective as in this case before, and we will tell you the method of the patient according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you put the patient on his side, then lift the suspender of the hairs away from your two shoulders, all the clothes that are near the edge, and tie the masters, and extend them as they are.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut the spatulum large enough to pass through the veins where they are found, and then scrape from every part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then she cuts a thread or it has two threads, and she ties it to the first part where her eye came out, and she ties it to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then, the copes are cut straightly according to the length of the corpse, and the decayed moisture is removed.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then, treat the wound as with others, or if it is an incision, so that no one will notice that a tooth was removed.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For there is no harm in this, and all the surgeons come to see, so it is necessary to treat the wounds on all the surgeons.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If he loses his strength due to the incision of the veins, and they become dry and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of a sinew
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The effects of this operation are that it comes by section or scar, or extension to the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines hang down from that rupture to one of the groins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either by scar or extension of the intestine, and these two methods cause the following:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or by percussion, or jumping, or burning, or lifting of the groin, and in similar ways.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is extension by scar are that it comes with small and small openings, in long tents, and there is no sudden coming.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it remains equal until it reaches the stomach, because the food presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is rupture of the tendon, which makes pain come at the beginning, and it is the grief faix appearing divers times, not far from the skin, and it is because of the exit of the intestine and the wound at the end of the tendon.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time does the circles descend with the intestine, and it is held back, and great pain is suffered by the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the incision if you command or the helper to put the intestine in their hand at the edge in the wound, if they can enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then it is severed between your shoulders, between your hands, and gently pull on the cords.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then the neck is cut at the base, and cut all the hair of the long coat.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then cut the tendons of the legs according to what you have experience in opening the wound, and they should be able to enter.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then the scorched skin that is full of hairs, as long as the white skin is not discovered in all parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then place your index finger in the area where the hair is taught, between the white skin that is full of hairs and the second skin, and go until you reach the end of the thigh, and then between the second skin.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then remove the left hand from the hair of the thigh, and the white skin is at the top of your right hand, and gently pull the leg towards the tail.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the minister to extend the leg at the top, and release that which is behind the thigh.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and you want your two to if there is no intestine wrapped or white and if you find nothing else, if the bowel is in the stomach.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then use a needle or if it has a thick thread made of 10 threads, and the bowel is in the anus, which is after the skin of the hips.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the size, then cut the heads that appear to have threads, as long as there are 14 threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the anus, which we mentioned is after the skin of the hips, with a strong thread of 2 parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the hairs, and they form two parts, so that no thorns can enter into the veins, as the cauteries do not hurt.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	Then tie the string according to the first long line, and then leave a piece of cloth that is not too tight, so as not to cause pain to the greatest part of the wound.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And then the rest according to the roundness of the ear.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut in the part that is too thin for the skin, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then, spread ointment on the rough hair with oil, and apply it to the wounds, and it will heal the one we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	For no time is this cauterized the white skin that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of the evacuation of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leaves the ointment for it to grow on itself.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it is late in the evening, and if it is heated with hot water, and it is applied as we have said, then it will grow.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then, treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia caruncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made if it is like the ram's testicle that is assembled with the veins, in a manner that you link the vessels, after cutting it lightly at the base;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then come to me, and cure the abscess of that which operates, as long as they cry out.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No time comes to raging wounds, unless we have said so, and open it.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and no intestines come down, and if they do, it's a pity, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if he grows too much in this point, if he thinks the wound or syphilis, as long as the intestines come down.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this comes from the extension of the gallbladder which is in wounds, because we have said, since it is extended, then soften and narrow the intestines and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	If the injury is treated by cauterization, as we have said before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And no time has it ever been cured in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And is that the patient's shoulder is tucked between his hands, then pull the limb of the dislocation as much as possible according to the amount of III dois.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then remove the splint that is soaked in oil, then take the hand and put it on the limb appearing to have much sweat.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And he presses on the abdomen, then cut the two limbs appearing to have much sweat from his hand, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then the head is pulled out, and does not catch on the face or extend the urethra or anything else, as I have informed you in the care of the gut of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then the treatment is through the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the threads, if the wound is cleaned and healed, as soon as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scar is bound, and has no appearance in the healing, and the cauterization is more effective at a distance from the wound, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the bones.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the hair of the eyebrows is plucked in men, because the strings that are densened are softened, and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is a task, when one sees the patient being cured, to make the patient sit on his heels, and the hair that has been plucked is cut on the natural hair.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then gather the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, the first surplus of softened leather is at three stitches or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then pass between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed, and close the thread.
dou chastrement	1. "dou chastrement" translates
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Since scarring is forbidden in our law, and because I think it would be best not to mention this in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and is necessary for only two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	One way is to measure the scar in response to being asked, and in the scar the treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And the other, because we often have to fasten some animals for our help, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that chastening is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attrition or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we do by attrition, make our seat the animal's hottest part, as long as it is softened and while.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then pull on it with your hand, as long as it is returned and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of chastening of length:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you tighten the animal, and press the hide of the joints to your left hand, then lift the suspender, and then do it on each part of the eye until you have well burned them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and he leaves no small amount of soap and the fine soap that is for the veins.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of fasting is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because in attraction nothing is desired except for pleasure, by which the beast desires luxury.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de fe
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermofaride is according to two methods for men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two members it is open as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or if it has hair, and never in cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other kind is in women, and has as its lips like a girl's and the lips.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the cure of the stomach and hunger if you touch all the loose charms, and cure them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second way, men whose urine leaps through the skin of the foreskin, if there is no care.
de la tentigene	Of the temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tentative is a loose char that is placed on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And no women have ever had such as this, and it is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you stretch the superfluity of the tentative with your hand or fingers, and lightly grasp it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not alert too much in front, because the cure depends on the patient's health, then the other cure as soon as it is safe.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another char that is in the mouth of the mother, and the employs, and by chance it fell, and it was like a crow, and for this they called the old "crow's disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to copy it, as we have said, and to cure it as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if it is due to the nature of the woman not being well informed, or the pustule is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or accidental by a disease that came later.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is due to a sharp char that sticks or subtle facial hair, and it is made in the mother's mouth, or on the cheeks, or chin, or wherever.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And then comes the design, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers have to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is by the rule of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	When the patient feels pain, if they want to stop or continue.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is hard to scratch, and it is like the cheese, if you hurry, and they turn into:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two indices together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then the cheese forms, as long as the hard scratch is over, and the overs are on their sides.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool and oil, and put it on the cheese, and put it under the woman's chin, and make her hold her mouth closed every hour, so that it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is hard and fast, then you must tie it with a thread like a sail cloth.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the head is dislocated, it is due to great exertion, if the spine and chest are involved.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And use the remedies that are known to draw blood, such as blood-letting herbs, incense, and an abundance of urine.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then make a wide cut, if the wound cannot be stitched.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And it should be long, and a clean cloth tent is made.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And continue with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	2. And when the swelling comes from burns, if it is necessary to cut according to this manner, do not be afraid of being enchanted.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	3. For the enchantment that is in the swelling, it should not be touched with force.
des emorroides	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Morsel wounds are openings of veins that do not become accustomed to being pierced, and when morsel wounds become large, they become the lump.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	In the division of appearances and signs, I will mention those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that both emorroydes and ulcers, when they are formed in marriage, do not appear to the touch, unless it is by the force of the cure.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the wife, one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then remove the thorns from the elderbush, and pulverize the leaves into medicines restricting blood loss, as well as those of dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then boil the herbs an hour, then let them cool in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if the blood flows out, then let it come in a decoction of sumac and the leaves of grapevine, pomegranate, and rosemary, and similar things. Then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and hazelnut, and apply it to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it becomes dislocated, it is bad.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, I make him sweat on the back and feel the bones hurting.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take in ginger juice or almond juice with wine vinegar, and sweat at the back.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has healed, treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the spicy herb thyme, so it should be covered like I said.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	wounds of the marriage bed
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscess come in the marriage, like gangrene and puerperal abscess and herpes and fistulas and abscesses and hemorrhoids and chancroid, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, in this treatment, I recommend treating the abscess that comes with the marriage, which is not the usual abscess but is caused by boils.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	1. If you see the sign of fire, then look at whether the patient is holding their breath at the beginning of their arrival, and from cold and fever, and if it becomes red, then you will see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	2. However, do not rush to use forceps, but make the patient wait until the pain is eased.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	3. Then make the patient lie down on the bed, and support their head with two pillows, and straighten their legs and gather their toes as much as possible, with the knee deflected from the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	4. And let their knees be expanded, and put their hands on their thighs, and hold them well with a belt.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then follows the pain from the left side of the chest, and the instrument used to open the mouth of the marsh comes out;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being used, you fix the rait first to know the size of the mouth, so that what comes out of the instrument does not exceed what it should be and does not hurt the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the rait is larger, then it is necessary to cover the size of the mouth with cloths, so that the rait does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary to put the instrument's horn in the mouth and adjust the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the sutures are opened, and it is made with the hand smooth, if it meets at the head, at the temple.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is seen, if it comes that you must put in the plague softened in olive oil or in green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And put the tent of the wound at the end of the marrow, and put under it the marrow and the pierced one that is clean softened in vinegar or salt.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the care after two days of dressing, as long as it is healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And never lift the wound and the plague by cloth of vinegar and honey, and then with vinegar or the roots of lis and Aristolochia are cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then comes the application of ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is treated with hot iron, then you must keep yourself from cooking with it, but we have said in the division how to do it.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Mastery is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman press her abdomen, and desires to smell the aroma of the herb.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	However, hurry to help the child birth.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	You should know that this childbirth is according to nature's figure, and it is the second one following the first.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her abdomen if the child is about to be born.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when he descends from his first child, if it is the second one following him, and the marriage is made with his superfluities through good cleanliness.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For there is no time when it comes to its full strength, and it comes to the chest or head, or hands, or the stomach or belly, and it is converted by chance or its own will, and through other harmful figures.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is skilled in the dance, so that it is wise and subtle in these matters, and warns against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures of what one must help with.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes to its father naturally, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the virtues of the child are weak, then if it is placed on a saddle or the women hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and its nature of oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then pour the ball between its two small stomachs, which is its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the second one, and cut it as much as the moisture that is left to be seen;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and cut the woman's belly as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to mix the woman with muskellunge oil with olive oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then I will make it dress and stir for a while, and hold its mouth and nose for an hour;
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if it is now the children;
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	If the hands are dislocated, then you must first gently lift them slightly.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the bed, and gently lift the feet towards her.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then lower the bed onto the ground, and make the woman lie down so she does not fall while standing.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If the hands cannot be inserted, and the child is dead, then take the hands at the corner that is in front of you, remove the child, and reset it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the child's foot
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes to its feet, if it is not possible to put them on high.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	Then the thorn is slowly removed as much as possible.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then the needle is gently pulled and extended a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump out of its place if commanded to, and I make it extend further by stretching?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps out, may God help us.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if it wobbles a little, until it is in accordance with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not jump out, we will use muslin cloth, olive oil, and melted wax, and all in the mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	And apply it according to the nature of a woman's skin, then I will make it stay in place until it dries on the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	When it is softened by heat, I cut it with a knife, put it on fire, and leave it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then I put it on the fire and make it boil, then I stretch its mouth and nose, and I press the stomach lightly, as its baby is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the child's issue when it is born
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if I put my hands on it quickly and often.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then I tie its neck with a string, and I hang its feet down, and then I open the door.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And I fold my hands quickly and often, and then I press the hands on the stomach, and I pull the legs apart as much as possible.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, then take his feet and make them form, then make them turn around, then pull your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and if the child is small and small.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and command the woman to give birth as much as the child will come.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer to bring the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If we cannot bring it, then lift the woman up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot move, then I will make her stand on the bed and bend her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then stretch the muscle that I have told you about.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	If it does not become a child, if it is placed on its side, then it studies the return of the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And the child according to its natural form, and it is stretched, and it commands that it be pulled as much as the child can hold.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child from its neck, and have expanded its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the dance paints its hand, then it turns a little and lightly, and the child.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equal, if it is placed on the muscle of another and oil, as we have said, then it commands that it move slightly and lightly;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, if it is placed on its side, and it commands that it be stretched.
et la fai esternuer.	The patient should then try to move the dislocated joint as gently as possible, without causing further pain or injury.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. In the same manner for all subsequent ones.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When the patient tries to move the dislocated joint in this manner for the rest of their life, if the second joint also becomes affected, as long as there is moisture present.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child can hold on to their face and neck, as long as the pain does not become unbearable, and they do not die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then give the child soothing medicine, as you have instructed, and command the woman not to touch it at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	However, if it is gently applied.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	It is said that twins are born many times, and never after the third or fourth time.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is a strange thing, and it doesn't happen often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	This is also a strange thing, and they don't live long, they have no name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and they are destroyed by the wicked one who decides them, which is bound to the abscess.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And never have they come naturally as all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come seriously, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and it is done quickly and lightly what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do it as it should be saluted.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	1. No time are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the sweet glorious wheat, and cover that the wild dance covers everything, as if by chance something similar happens.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	2. If it is done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	3. When you treat the woman who has given birth to a stillborn child or is in her belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to deliver with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	4. If it is necessary that you cut that the woman is of healthy virtue and has no accident or dies;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it comes to pass that the woman is pregnant on her back, and her head is inclined downwards, and her legs are raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife applies the second degree burn, or if she is in bed if she is not treated for the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then anoint the mouth of the midwife with moist oils of olive, mustard, and fenugreek, and the seeds of flax, then take her hands away from these oils and these ointments.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then lightly bind her wrists, then let the legs be loose or she bites the nails that are capable of being bent at this time, and wait until the child is descending from its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the shoulder bone is seen in the arm, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the ear, or on the beard, or in the eyelid, or near the ribs, and if it is felt to be stuck, then it should be freed with care and the costal cartilage.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary to scrape the shoulder bone with your left hand, and place the feather between the thumb and index finger of your right hand, and gently pull it, and free the shoulder bone from any of the places we have mentioned until it fits into the empty state.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the shoulder bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then find another bone, or if you are skilled enough, if the extraction is equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then the joint is aligned by moving from both sides, and the patient's hand should be held firmly, if like this is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part is loose, if there are any of its two oils on that side, and take out the other side, and handle the other part:
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it does not come loose, then put this bone or higher up, and do as much as it comes out completely:
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by traction, then it should be wrapped around as much as possible, until it is completely:
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then the copious application is in the joint of the heel or elbow, and it is necessary that you apply it with the other hand, and then put on the shoe.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and comes out with difficulty, or there is a crowning present, then you must separate the sharp spatula between your two hands, and pull the head and remove the crown.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can put it in the instrument called "almidach", if the form comes with the forceps or the cauterization that follows it.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and then you can apply the child naturally with a large head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Then, treat the bones with nails, and if the head of the shoulder jumps out, it is pulled by force as much as possible, even if it is bent, until the moisture that caused it comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot be extracted, if it sticks to the skin as you pull,
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is bent at the belly or the ribs, then you must push it as much as possible until the moisture corrects it.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is among its flock, if it is the light attraction, and the milk of the mother is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted at the belly or the anus, then you must twist it loose with your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And if you stretch the belly or the anus as much as possible, until the moisture corrects it.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if the other member becomes inflamed, and the shoulder is swollen, if the pain is great, then the person draws their hand back from the joint, and pulls it out of the mouth of the joint.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then they either cut or split, and they take it out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the mouth of the joint is narrowed by the wound that it has come from, and there is no way to open it, then it must be managed with moist and light things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the management is applied, and it is softened and made moist and cool.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is crying on its chest, and you put it down equally, then manage it as we have said in the live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If it is not possible, if the bone breaks into pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, make sure to follow the instructions we have given for the aftercare.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood comes out, if it is put in a washcloth to stop the bleeding, and other treatments are made.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another and was told that it would die, the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came some abscesses in the flesh, and inflamed as soon as they were opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I used strong astringents for great attraction, and after some days more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised much, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought that it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I want the wound, and with my hands I will treat it as much as the woman was in better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman held her breath for a little while, and there was a little blood;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I did not remember this chapter to be because when the master saw an extraordinary thing, he thought to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocation back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at the turning of the head of the shoulder.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the corner should be more subtle and narrow, and should be flat or rounded.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth should be of a due length, and the margins of the trees should be long, and half as long as a palm.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the shoulders should be of two joints of this same bone, which are closed on one side and open on the other, half a palm long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these joints are closed in the mouth of the shoulder to open when turning the head corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of flat board or beech, according to the appearance of the tacks.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two joints, as you see, of a palm of long wood, and they must be wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the mare open wide with all the instruments, if you place the woman on her side and the thighs over, then adjust the joints together in the mare, and hold the end of the instrument's handle between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then use your hand on all the instruments, as you have done with the tacks evenly, according to the amount you see open the mare's mouth, until it stops making noise that you can hear.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all around us, and their appearances are multiplied.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you look at them, the more they work, the higher they become in number.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	2. If you do not despise the instrument that you have not yet examined, because its needs are not easily satisfied.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second child is retained in the womb, if you command the midwife to release the hair, and then the placenta comes out, and your hands are forced to the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps for joy at this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then I can, and make a pincushion or cupping glass, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the child, such as calamine, rose, anise, chamomile, cascarilla, and century plant.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or none of them, must be cooked or placed on fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a cain or pertus that can be burned, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and heat it until the vapors come out of the mare.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then the dressing is applied, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second part is fast.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not worse, then order the physician to take her left hand in oil of sesamum or musk, and then blow into the mouth, and then apply the second one.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds it, if she pricks and extends it little by little, so that the mare does not resist the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but the goal is to move lightly to the left and right, then pull it out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and comes out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is closed, we have said the treatment is to suture and fumigate with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not all of what we have said, then keep that you do not pull out;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but what is in the mouth of the wound, you should tie it to the woman's thigh, then dress with ointment tetrafarmacone.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it is purged and reset, and it comes out correctly.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But if it comes out with bad smell from the stomach and head, and pierces the physician.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If then come fumigations suitable to this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	no one of the old has experienced fumigations of garlic and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is such that it burns the woman with the retention of flowers and the second wind if this is:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it seems like a dog, and puts it on the head subtly in nature, and the large ones under the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and if the fumigations are on the coals, and the ash as it is, and another one begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to perceive the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not felt the foundation, but it has been swept with some subtle soap.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it comes to the point that he cannot cut through the flesh with his blade, and does not cut with a sharp one, and roughens the skin without touching it, then...
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then he should grind his blade on vine and oil, and apply the ointment as soon as it is sharp.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not stay, if you put a catheter in its place and leave it hands free, and it is able to move when the child sees them going into the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes a wound or abscess that is soothed by salt.
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it comes to soothe that wound or abscess with salt...
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If you apply it, as we have said of the dog's bite.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula with great foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow when they come from the delve of the foundation, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	When that node is old, if it is worked on, and the moisture is removed with soft flaps or subtle bows, and they are never formed into fistulas.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	They are known by the fact that they are caused by either elimination or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance, some fall.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistulas are in the bladder and half in the vagina.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach the joint of the thigh and the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And it is known that the fistula is not present at its base, and does not have a fistula.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you cut your index or foundation, and insert a small needle of iron or silver into the fistula when it has no kinks.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has kinks, then insert a small tent of silk or horsehair, as soon as you feel the tent or hair in your hand.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no bleeding, no vomiting, or wind, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	Make sure it does not pierce through.
si te haste dou curer.	If you feel pain.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is present in the bladder or conducted from the urine, if it leaks and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	And if it pierces through the joint of the thigh, as soon as it reaches the knee.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If it does not have twisting and the cause of the pain is not known, then it is because there is no remedy for it, and no medicine can be applied to alleviate it.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these Persian fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of the proud who enter into them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not Persian and not ancient, there is hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the physician's hand is between your hands on his back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he gently lifts the legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then cut around the hair, or if it is knotted, as long as you can until the tent comes off.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain at the foundation, it means that the tent has been cut too short, so you should cut it off.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And if you feel between your fingers the hoof or the horn, then cut it off, and check that it is straight.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If you cannot trim it with a knife, do not try to cut it off.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is difficult to say whether one can cut it all, but this is rare.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And if it helps, if you make the fire cautery subtle according to the size of the fistula, as described earlier.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the bone is very hard in the fistula as it approaches the foundation.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times until you feel that these points must be assisted, which resemble a pen of feathers;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of tented wounds is rolled in burrs, as long as it stays open, then the treatment of ointment is poured on and allowed to dry.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healthy, so good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is done, no other remedy can be found.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is tried in, and does not pierce the foundation, which is either the base or the head, and cover the opening with a thick layer of char or soot, and you see the fistula coming out that shows the covering dust;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the head of the fistula, and it comes out before the tent, and then the cauterization afterward, as long as it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be delivered from the tent, and will cause pain.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then the deformed ones that seem like a feather of a hummingbird, and there will be none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the flesh, whether by fire cauterization or medical boiling.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery, it assembles two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the surety of these deformed ones, and the stopping of blood and the treatment of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of soft tents in burrs or in the throat as long as it does not gutter, and it will be the deformed ones to enter the gutter.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound of the sulfurous ointment with dry heat, and the medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes suddenly from the depths, and it is moved away from the heart, if the wound is deep or shallow, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and it is the cloth or silk or charcoal, or it is near to being pierced, if not it had been only a way of hope and marriage, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize as we have said, or you cover it with a cloth and treat it as if it were the first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not cause me too much trouble by cutting it, but cover the foundation with a cloth and let the excretions come out through the desired hole;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then the cure, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance, if it is healthy, you uncover the covering and sew it then when it is covered with foam, or by hand or with another appointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then mold the wound that is in the wound, as you please.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound and prolong the fistula in the part where the foundation is lacking.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is a more delicate thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And no time are fistulas in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And when you tie the knot in the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation due to the lack of leather, if you take a knot at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you cut it in two, and thread the tent through all the filth in the fistula as much as it is at the head:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is present in the edge of the foundation, then pull out the thread of that pustule, so that you reach the bottom or the foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and cut off the end of the thread, and assemble the two parts together, and pull them apart, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain it ever, as long as the threads cling to the charms that are between two, and twist.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound as soon as it is sore and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all possible ways that you can, it will not work if it is too tight.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not recommended to make the fistula by tightening too much, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny thorn that was used to make the fistula is, if it is sharp and pointed, partly cut and trenched.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, because one does not catch what one does not need to catch, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of the embryos.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Error messages are according to two methods:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Or they are denser at the foundation, like grains of resin, and they become smaller and larger, and with cutting they cause pain, and there are several or more, and they weaken the foundation and the head of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that are weaker have little moisture, and they cut or a few lemon juice or a few wine, and they have the color of corruption.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have denser foundations is that you command the patient to spit out whatever he can into the chambers as much as possible until the foundations are weakened, and they will appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you catch it quickly, and you can hold it with your nails, or you keep it in your finger, then the copper takes its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the uncinate cannot hold it by its moisture, then you can tie it to a string, or a cloth, or a piece of cambric.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract them from your two hands, then wrap them, and powder with some warm powders that are in the fire cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or if you cauterize them as it is said in the fire cautery, and treat them with other remedies until they are healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the bones do not fit, then cauterize the patient with a clisterant, which is bitter and sharp when washed, so that it can be opened widely.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	The patient should not cut their hair, and if they do, they should be gentle with it.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And if you cut your hair with scissors or tweezers, trim it, then treat it as we have advised, until it is healthy and does not fear the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If you wish to mend the stitching according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a thread, cut it to length, and thread it through the needle, then pull it tight at the other end, and turn the two ends of the thread around the needle point, and if it is too wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and pulls the thread tight, then loosens the thread, removes the needle, and does the same for all the others, leaving only the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then lays the foundation draped and smooth with oil or wax, and lays it down, and instructs the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leaves it until it heals, and when it is healed, if there are other treatments such as ointment and other treatments, then it will be healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dis
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there are knots in the intestines, and by constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you are ordered to return at the point of a spear or your nail, which does not allow it to dry.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then the doctor, as he can, so as it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if he cannot reduce it, then the dislocation becomes more severe than before, until it is painful and burned.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor, as he can.
dou fremit	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Furuncle is a small appearance that should be removed from the body and goes away in front.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never the wound does not heal, and it is felt as if it were dead, and comes throughout the body, and more with the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the doctor if you take a thorn from a goose quill, or a vulture's feather, and put that thorn on the wound, as it circumnavigates the wound totally around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand along all the chain as you catch all its trembling, and place it in front, and adjust the trembling of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if I make this of a nail of iron or silver according to this form, and it is subtle and thin:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not forget, but hold tight, and press with your hand.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if the cauterization of the trembling is done, as it is in front or according to the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	The form of the fire cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	No time has been made where a clasp of silver or an archaut, or a melted or hammered iron, has been made.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And no time has been made where these small and large bites are made, according to the ones that are stolen from them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the fire clistery is small and large if it is made wide, or the belly is made in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and if it has a deviation or the belly is lied, as you see, and the head is dislocated perceived.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and if it has an injury or one of the ribs is fractured, and the other is not.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and if it is in the belly or a vessel of beef or cheese is inserted, and all the wounds are seen through, and there must be a spice between each wound, then pour through these wounds a strong thread made of thread crooked in X or along the edge, and assemble the belly as if it were a hedgehog.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is given, if the string is to the instrument before a strong thread, then close it.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or ointment made of urine or something similar, then apply it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the physician should mix it with his two hands as thoroughly as possible, until it is well mixed, then remove the clister, and gently lift the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine is visible, so be it.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps all night, it will be more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you are dislocating due to disease of the abdomen, and the physician is hurrying to help, then it returns as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the patient has an abscess or gangrene, if the clister is also very fine, as with the child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And it is the form of a subtle clister that is formed when the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the division of the cure of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the parts where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things made by wounds are made by the point of the pierce, and the size of the tooth and the cuticle, or the lance, or the staff, or the spear, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or what is made according to the wounds of the body, like a plague that is made on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simplest wounds, as the remembering comes in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes or is born, and it is not broken, if it is caused by cutting or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubtlessly have an abscess forming:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if the head is becoming safer of the wound itself if it comes out little blood from the wound, and it is healthier on the opposite side of the affected part:
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And the patient avoids excessive consumption of wine and large pieces of meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not see better, if his meat is weak, and he does not drink wine, and does not eat cheese.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and puts the wound in oil, and if it comes out easily, it is washed with linen or rancid olive oil only, or with wine tincture.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if he does not wash the wound with oil, and puts it on the wound, it is fresh at all its base, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say here afterwards.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he moves the wound, and puts it on any bandages, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a spearhead and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be assembled by tents, if they can be assembled by stitching, if I say as belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it can be held only with one hand, then it is a fracture.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then, treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hardness of the leather in the leg, and instruct the patient to eat large amounts of meat, such as testes and cooked frogs, as well as chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you cut or burn the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then it is a wound. If it is burned, let it cool down, and then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if blood has gathered in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without surgery, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, then the blood vessel should be cut. If you can stop the bleeding with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If this does not benefit, then the cauterization is not useful.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then a light cure is sufficient.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And do you put this powder on the wound that seems to have been burned.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And how the powder should be applied is.
pren encens une partie;	Take some tinder and a part of it.
sanc de dragon II parties;	two parts of dragon's blood.
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	three parts of chalcedony, and the fine powder, and apply to the wound, and extract as much as it adheres well and joins with all its sand.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	Then she wells, and leaves it to drip, if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the medicine is not used until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no time has it been done with just chalz, when one does not have incense or the dragon's blood, but that the arse has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound is swollen, immediately in this way, if no other powder is used.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put some digestive ointments, or wheat flour made into a paste with water and honey, until it is smooth.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of other treatments as long as it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if it is extracted with thin tweezers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	I will tell you about fractures of the little finger later.
de la plaie dou col	of a minor wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes or goes and it is simple, but if there is no difference between the two and the collarbone or the artery is not affected.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the case, if there is no other means than to let nature take its course and make no restrictions, because it harms the nerves and pulls them back.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of such is with the brain, which is the more sensitive members.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but if the medicine is salted, like chalz washed in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and the wound washed again in gentle water, and other nails done this way, and moistened.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, and the edges are not torn, then the cure as soon as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are clean and the hair is long and full of fleas, either at the bottom or lower on the leg.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is closed, and the blood flows away, when it should not, and the limb is weak, and the cauterization is difficult;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the neck is closed, or the jaw, and the guide is kept, as long as the meat goes, if the bone is above the jawbone, and it is not touched but is returned according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then the strain is applied, and it leaves some scars, then the treatment of wounds is discarded as soon as it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound makes an impression on the bone, if you wish.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	If there are pieces of bone, if you carefully remove them, and those that you do not remove, if they remain long enough to cause the wound to fester and become inflamed, then leave them as they are.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If he has bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then the treatment is as I have described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a lance or a spear wound, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound's depth and consult the surgeon about the patient's condition.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	And scars are known to be fatal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	If it is not properly shaped and fresh at all its joints, if it is not put on at the first hour with powder, and it is not held by the sore that does not worsen, and returns to the body, and the patient feels better.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	However, if I apply an attractive ointment and it is tied twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if there is no ointment, then put cotton in the wound for moisture and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no spasm, and the patient does not have muscle twitching or shaking from the waist.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the proper arrangement, if you suspect that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Cure the wounds with tendons and other treatments as necessary to be healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot be healed, and you suspect that it has formed an abscess, then...
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is done as it should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is of incision or contusion, and it is simple, or on the side, or at the back, if the treatment is done by the one who is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, of costure;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and in pieces, if you want the wound to heal, and they are made to be if they are dissolved;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	If they do not heal, leave the wound exposed, and straighten the drawings.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And other wounds on other parts of the body are judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	A sudden and severe pain in the stomach.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocations of the stomach are large and numerous and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Of the large wound, no time does the intestine jump, or the intestines are torn, because of the insertion of others.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitching is more painful, and never once is it better for the small wound than the large, because if one does not reinsert the intestines often, they are not reinserted in turns.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	For this reason, the intestines swell so much that they feel pain, if they return more frequently, and for this reason it is difficult to heal the wound, for it is hard to realign the intestines in their place like others have done.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you know that the rupture of the belly is in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common ones come in the belly wound, and the other wounds of the chest and the rest are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all of them are more clean with the belly wound, and I will say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no inflammation in the intestines, and it is a simple matter to reset, this is done by one of the two following ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are twisted due to the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is swollen, you should cleanse it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or a damp cloth only, or you can use hot water and add vinegar and salt, and rinse the intestines as much as they are swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And no time has it been made to fasten this wining, and it is dead that it does not hold.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the blossom leaving, if the intestine is hot or cold and uneven, for this is the cause of the passage being narrow.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then make a small wound in the plague with the instrument and take out the hemorrhages.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	The first treatment is dead that it is not big enough, for there is no need to cut it in such a great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the cause of the stripping.
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If a thorn penetrates the skin and is not removed, and it remains there for a long time, it may cause the following symptoms:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs out, if you put it back according to its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, because this is what is needed.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	If the wound is wide and located in the lower abdomen, it may be necessary for the patient to lie down on their back and raise their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	If the wound is located in the lower abdomen, it may be necessary for the patient to lie down on their back and raise their head and legs higher than their waist. The goal is to elevate the affected part above the other to reduce pain and swelling.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And it is necessary to manage these large and dirty wounds accordingly.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	The wound is small as you see, then take your hand and administer the pitious that stains all the rawness of your hand, and gather your lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	This is the common way to stitch, and you use a needle or more, according to the size of the wound's depth, then leave the end of the wound open and sew it with a thread as strong as it has;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two heads of the hide with the two heads of the sutures, which are loose from the hide, as long as you can pierce that part, and assemble the four ends of the sutures together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the thread of a double needle passes through the eye of the second part, then assemble the two heads of the wound, and then leave out two spaces, and then pass another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then continue to pull the thread of the needle as you have done with the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you are used to with needles, until all the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And the needles should be sharp and not too large, because sharp needles close all the wound, and very large ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore, they must be sharp.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to thrust the nails too deeply into the flesh and hide, which do not close and cause the wound to protrude before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then close the heads of the nails, so they do not cause swelling in the patient at night, and put on or drape cloth at the nail heads to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of stitching nails is more convenient in small wounds, because it does not cause an injury to the nail.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second method is common, and it is that you sew together the two ends of the leather and the two ends of the thread with one nail or it has a strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	When you have perceived these four conditions assembled, reset the wire at the part where you began, in the manner we have described.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and insert a splice between each stitch of a large thread of a minor doe.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch saved the man, and I saw a wound that some had in their belly, which was caused by a cut, and it was a wound more than a palm of great size, and it had intestines several pales of great size, and it was the wound in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I opened the intestine and it had been there for 24 hours, and the wound was 15 years old, and I treated it and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And he saw that it would die, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not treat it with any remedy, as I am in the first stage where none is found and no medicine works.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put a piece of cloth soaked in wool over the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey as often as it is needed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I would tell you two ways of dressing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and pull out the thread from the part that is most difficult to sew.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has reached the right side in the right direction, if you have pulled the needle or cut it or pulled out the thread, and then try to percerate another part of the part that is difficult to sew.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And if you understand this method, then follow the example of the barber who combs his beard, and leaves once with one part, and takes it back with another, until the hair is entirely combed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, which Galen himself describes, is such that no one does it otherwise, by naturally bringing together the two parts, and applying one part of the hair comb to the other, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Choose a needle or haircomb that is appropriately sized, and carefully insert it into the flesh, and leave the two hair combs.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make sure it is firmly in place, and use the two hair combs.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then I will feel the other side of the swollen part, in two other points located on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most common way to sew and stitch.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this, and no one testifies to it, so we must sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And it must be sewn with one needle on one side and the other on the other side, in the same way as those who are sewing crooked.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And you should know that when the wound is in the belly, it is the stitching that is more painful than other belly stitches.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	And it is that when you touch the fresh wound with all its sand, if it has not moved, then it must be reset, and the intestine is turned, and it is good.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then put on the powdered earth char, and if it has not moved, then put on any poultice that is present, as long as the wound bows.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And tie the string, and be sure the shackle is tight, and the mirror.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as you would with others, as long as it is healthy.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	When you have no medicine, if you put it, as much as it comes out of the belly, it gushes out like water, and it is moved twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other craft than this one to treat wounds, which are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound is not a principal limb, then it comes to milk the lighter in oil of calamus or rose oil, and put it on the edges, and dry them;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or abscess in the wounds, and often comes, then the dressings should be changed with wine from Germany, and at the same time the abscess comes to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And the percussion of the belly, and the scissors that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the veins that surround it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the gum jumps from the wound, if it is reset as the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is swollen and turns black, then you must reset the dark one that has veins and arteries, because it has bones and blood.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then pull what is between the ligaments and put the two heads down until it is loose to align the extraction as the gum jumps, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the bursting of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored by a few men, because I have seen that some were healed from the belly or abdomen of a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And the wound was on the left side of the stomach, and it became ulcerated and formed a fistula, and in it was the egestion and the vomiting.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not stop refining until it was healthy, and I saw the results.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw the improvement, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there is no harm, but it delays in better conditions, and eats and drinks.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and no one knows that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be stitched in a certain way.
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	First, pull the wound apart, then stitch the corners of the wound, and when the wound has been stretched out, put the lips on either side of the wound to hold it closed.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then, the wound is closed, and it stays in place if it does not slip, then close the other end in the same way as before, until the wound is completely surrounded.
et cout la plaie.	And the wound is counted.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the intestines are infected in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a very fine thread that is woven from the intestine of a beast, in the same way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this intestinal thread that is full of excrement, and then tie it to the end of this linen thread, then pass the thread through the needle, and count the intestine, and reset it in the dislocation;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this way of stitching is not feared that according to the way of marriage and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, then it is subtle and not healthy, so it should be treated with care.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula," and also if they are thin and have a narrow opening.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And the fistula is according to the nodulation that must be hard and painful, where one feels pain, and it is as fine as the tail of a feather.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never in a clear jump, and sometimes thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and never small, and sometimes quite.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that all wound that is not healed, and there is no pain, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This is to know, by the slight pain of the wound or corse;
ou por sa malice;	or for malicious intent;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because he has hardened his teeth and bites them, which he does not let go;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or he has too much bite;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the thread is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is delayed in digestion, and delayed in health, and escapes by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	If there are wounds or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The following lines are the translation of the given Old French text into English:
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Wounds that fistula come in all members of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For it has fistulas that come from large wounds, arteries, nerves, or the face, intestines, rectum, bladder, or any of the ribs, spine, or joints of the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it comes to the part of the member that belongs to the proper owner, and they are similar to this.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas of this kind are of unhealthy salvation, and only labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there are no fistulas that do not come out of the body as I have said, and you are a doctor of the cure, and you see it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if you want; and if the fistula is straight, then do so.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is curved, then search for a fine tent of linen, because the threads will twist inside the curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula is forced and you do not find it well by tents, then search for it with the other pertus, because the moisture is short of one pertus and makes it clean.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then, when you feel pain, know whether it is bone or flesh, and gently ask the patient to indicate where they feel the pain when you press with your hand, and the limb where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know the limb where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or any of the limbs I have mentioned, if the coupe follows what I have said, and oste be the fault and the corrupted parts that are denoted;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then, when it is healthy, and the fistula is well sutured in the right place, if you cut in the same way, as far as you can, then you put fine tentacles in the medicine ague, and you thrust them into the bottom of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is excessively produced at the fons.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then he puts antiseptic agents in clean hands as much as possible.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not clean, then he cauterizes as we have said, and if the wound is corrupted by the fistula, then the copper.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves do not cause pain or limbs, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the wound is discovered and it has corrosion and blackness, as long as the corruption is all extensive, then the treatment of clean hands as we have said.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not clean, and the wound is deep, as we have said, ask what you are not able to do.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If dislocation occurs and you are able to do it, and remove all corruption, then restore the joint.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is in good health, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, then you should know that the corruption is too deep, and it will not improve.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other engine but a lashing of nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if it has small corruption and you remove it with thorn, if it is strained to the instrument that is suitable for this, and if it has more, if you remove them all, do not leave any.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if the moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear, then cope and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	If you do not clean the wound at once, then put on something to absorb moisture and leave it on until the pus comes out of the bones, and then if they become lighter, the bones will be easier.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	If it is large bones, such as those of the thigh or knee, if you only clean it so long as the blackening is all over, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	If it has a large part of corrupting, and comes to the bone's end.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it is necessary to sew and cover all the corruption, and then treat it as much as possible.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of an example of a fistula that came to the leg of one man, if you pay attention and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	It was a young man who, at the age of XXX, had a pain in his leg for a reason that came from the chest, so much that the materials came to the leg, and he was fled by a large abscess, and there was no cause to open;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but they overwhelmed them so much that the abscess overflowed, and it corrupted the materials, and became a fistula, and there came out of it blood and pus from the belly and moisture from the chest;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And for the next two years, and no one had any skill in the art of hands, as long as I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to cure it, and what rotted due to the pustules of great heart;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red in his youthful chest, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some went into another part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I thought, and in one of the pustules I found a part of the bone, and I discovered it was rotten and hollow, and it came from the hollow of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was he who appeared from the rotten bone, and I made sure there was no other corruption, for that was what I stayed for;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound of the soda patient with long ties, and could not be closed.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I reopened it, and found the bone as before, and discovered that the infection continued in the bone, and dressed it, and then closed the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not cut all the way through the bone, and it turned to one side, then I restored it with drugs.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healthy and closed quickly, and I no longer wished to open the wound because of the patient's weakness, which could not endure it, and for fear of death that I had caused him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For since the blood was often evacuated, but it was completely cured, and there was a hard char on the bone, and it was well positioned and had no harm or contradiction in any way, neither in the air nor coming out.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken at any joint of the arm, then it should be set in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Tie the cloth, and pull on the end of the bone that is open, and command it not to extend further up.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	Then tie another large loop on the second loop, and tie it around the bone that is sticking out, and make sure the end is in the correct position. Then draw the broken piece of the bone back into the socket, and cut off the excess, so that it does not break the bone.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	Then put a sponge or a piece of cloth on the bone to cover the broken piece of the bone.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary to soak as much as possible and can be seen and felt the corruption, and soak again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the environment or in a part of it, if the chest is completely opened.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put the bone in place, and then be of one part of another the corruption, and let the soaked part of the corruption be as long as the bone we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, if the corrupted joint is closed, and it is the bone or it contains another part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption is found in the continuation of the second joints, if there is no other cause but darkness.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if corruption is found in the finger or toe, if it is not strong, but it is necessary that you investigate that corrosion, to see how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but the vein or nerve will not oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And sharpen the scalpel and the threads according to the appearance of the bones, and their size, thickness, and width, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	For this reason, it appears to adjust to each appearance of its tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And you should be confident that the operation will show the instrument you will use, according to the knowledge of this art, and it testifies to the methods of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you lack the instrument you should have according to what is needed.
dou feu	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder will become loosened either due to weakness or due to decay.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated the corrosion by medicine, and it does not improve until the member reaches the shoulder or the corrosion comes, if the malady is caused by death or by malice, which is greater, by the defect of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	When the signs appear that the limb becomes black, if it seems to be from burning heat, and it turns red after turning black, then corrosion spreads throughout the member, and it takes hold of all parts.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you feel burning pain, and it is due to the impact of some beasts' venom, like that of a sea scorpion and weasel, and the corrosion reaches the tip of the finger, then the cure is not to give in to the pain and come to help with your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to your hand, if the cure is given to the joint, then the corrosion does not come to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	If it comes to the arm, if the wound is at the elbow.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	If it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no way to save it but the quantity of its courage.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And so it is when the corrosion comes or pain.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes in the first joint, if the wound is after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	If it comes with pain, if the wound is all pain.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it goes up the leg, if the wound is at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	If it comes from the thigh, if there is no other way but to kill the patient with pain.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	The patient should gently bend the limb if it is not already bent, and then hold one end of the limb steady while another person holds the other end. This should be done until the bone is discovered between the two bones.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then wrap the limb with cloth, and if it does not touch the healthy skin, then go to the physician for another injury and infection.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the skin immediately, or if you put on any restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, then tie the affected member with a flexible cord, and treat it until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to my home in short:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	it happened to my home a darkness that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in the morning, consuming all the property.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when we saw the corrosion, if it could be stopped from spreading, and it was saved.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and later, when it returned with the hand, and it came to me, and I did certain things after the disinfection of the corrosion, but it could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and I say that I will hold his hand, and I do not hope to feel the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die because the strength of his arm was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became desperate and returned to his land, and took hold of his hand and was cured.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have never heard of anything better than this, because it is the best way.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never has an abscess come in the charnut, and it takes as long as it takes to gather many arrows.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they pierce and break, and by jumping the arrows, and make them give way to the wound, just as some slaves.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	The patient's clothing that is cut is also as delicate as silk, and does not cut through the bone or nerve, and such disease is called "hernia", and is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	However, if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	If the clothing that has been cut is entirely removed, and at the same time it is as delicate as silk, like some drapes.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and should not be cut for fear of corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are engaged and the clothing is cut, and corruption is not at the front, and the hair is very thick, then the treatment of cleansing is necessary.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	1. Pay attention to the size of the breasts, and the belly that is in it, since it is of a strong odor, therefore the clitoris is treated with Egyptian medicine that has been made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	1. Take asafetida, oil, and turmeric, in equal parts, and cook them in a pot over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes thicker than honey:
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	1. Then use this according to your need, and make it into an ointment and honey, and apply it to the breast, and draw out the pustule:
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	1. Leave the medicine on for two hours, then draw it out by squeezing:
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	I will make this many times, until the breasts are deformed and the pain is unbearable.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And never has it been clitoralised with ash, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you ignite grapevine ash, and the ash is poured, then it flows, and in clitoralisation, as long as you feel that the breast is well deformed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot bear it, and the Egyptian medicine does not cause ash, then clitoralise with ash and honey or if there is a little litharge in the mixture.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	If you choose to cleanse the wound with honey and wine mixture, where honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes it aerate the healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this, and you are sure that the wound is well cleaned, if the cleansing is done with what is most suitable for the case, and it is that you apply it as determined, and they do with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or if you choose to cleanse the wound with some medicines and ointments, as I have mentioned the properties or treatment of the ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the wound is small, and the cleansing does not enter, if it is enlarged from a piece of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is polished.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	When the wound is too large, if it does not allow the needle and thread to enter, and if the purulent discharge is coming out of the opposite side, then the stitching will be insufficient, or it may be below the wound.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the wound is closed, if it does not allow the needle and thread to enter, then the stitching will be insufficient.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you do not cover the wound completely as you see, and it appears in such a way that the wound comes to the lowest part of the skin where it was, since when the wound is closed, if it does not allow the needle and thread to enter, and if you do not cover the wound completely as you see, and it appears in such a way that the wound comes to the lowest part of the skin where it was, then the stitching will be insufficient.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	That the bowel moves lightly and leaves nothing of the bowel.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to strengthen the stomach, and they are hung on the loose linen that covers the entire stomach.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cope as forces to push the wound further into the side, because they are bandages soaked in the other linen according to the amount of wound, and they are placed over the wound of the stomach to align the bowel, and do not leave the large fold only after once more once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one who is on the side of the wound often for the stomach, should often touch the bowel, and check what comes from the bowel, whether it is venom or too little, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	When the patient feels pain or knows it, and if it has gangrene or not, and when your medicine has been extended and you see its nature leaping from the wound, if it seems that the breasts have already settled, and approaches the health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then remove the morning or evening, and when you notice the wound, if it changes to another fold, and change the ointment;
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not milked.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venoms are subtle and short after a long journey, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For he has many horses that delay in making char for his wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if he bows indigestibly after one day, if it seems that the breasts have not settled yet;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	When the shoulders are delayed in setting, and they are reset, if the medicines are moist in substance and dry in virtue, then it is definite injury, for it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the underlying medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	If the injury is definite, and it is treated with rose oil, and the wine is equal in substance.
puis le confit et en use;	Then it is cooked and used.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And the same thing is made with honey that is cooked and increased when definite injuries are not present, or you take a knife and aloe and incense, and the broth, and the powder on the honey when it is near the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	Then they apply ointment and wrap it around the wound, and it is never administered by an astrologer for long, and roots of the celestial lily, which is also like fine flour and earth.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And they use either simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	They boil them, and then powder them, and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the wound is large, and not cured by this treatment, then you should know that corruption has set in, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the care of the fistula cure, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that often occurs due to the infection of the thumb or big toe, or by chance in other parts.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	When it is inflamed, and it is not taken care of, if an abscess forms, and it runs and pours out blood until it reaches the root of the toe, and by chance it runs all the way;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion to the bone, as soon as it comes with pain, and the head of the joint is large, and the color is changed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, if you cover all the excess that is made from the finger, then cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail is pressed against the bone, and it begins to prickle, and bleed, then you should remove the part of the nail that points at the bone, and cut it off high up, and carefully and lightly apply fire-and-corrosion medicated ointments all over;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care of burns should be taken when it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, and it is removed, because as much as the bone corrupts and becomes, so it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If you see the second knuckle corrupt, if the copper is in I of us as it was said before, then the cure once it is healthy.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	If it is frozen, and stop, and it feels great pain, then it comes that you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the bone that is spatulate and hard in half, and make sure the cut does not reach the bone, for the patient will feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the dislocated shoulder
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is quite rare, and by chance it can be doubled, and never once it can be broken, and no one is born in the root of the jointure, or the birth is in any of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those who do not have any other pain in the second knuckle and do not move, and those who have pain in the joint of the second knuckle by chance move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of the one who is tight so is light, in part manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size it from its root a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who finds in the root of the joint is grievous to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold tight copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the case where the head of the shoulder is dislocated from behind, if you can first cover the joint with a clean cloth, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The causes that come are either from birth, or from wounds, or from burns, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If they cover that the copper covers the soured, if it must be repaired according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then put between two tent or draped softened in oil rose, that it does not sweat.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you put between two pieces of cloth subtle, as it is sour, if it comes.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The patient comes to none of its two with the hand if it is not hot enough, as it should be.
des vils	of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Thick veins are heavily wrapped with excessive melancholic fullness, coming from more and more corpulent members.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often in the legs of those who go to church and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must never administer any purge of colic, and then the proper dose of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron cure is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One way is to hammer, and draw out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to tie the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, the hot leg is raised with great force, until it is large and not subtle, then the other leg is tightly wrapped with the hair of the tail, from the part below the knee to the groin.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein at one point, either at the first, second, or third, of a large size, then take and draw out the dark blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as you can, as much as the patient's strength allows.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	Then tie it off, and order that it be painted with black meat juice.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And continue the evacuation and cleaning as the veins become clear, and inform the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The lesions of the affected area are treated in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Shave the patient's leg, if it has hair, then put it in warm water, and make the leg red and swollen by applying heat to the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	If you do not have any bread, if the fire cautery is used, and then the cloth is placed in the vein at the long end of the thigh or in the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then apply the cloth to the gouge, and burn each part of the vein as it appears when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you will see red and black, and when it enters or leaves, it seems as though it is a thick string;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then cut the cloth below the knot, as soon as it is loosened from the cloth, and then place it in another part of the thigh, and then pull it out in three;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scorch the leather on the vein as much as it appears, then smooth it with the rasp, just as you have done, and it can be used for another incision, just as you have done first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut a larger size, or more than you are used to, then smooth it, and carve at the sharp edge, then trim and smooth the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract the larger size, as much as it will fit, then smooth it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot extract it, and if it sticks to the skin so much that it requires a needle of great force double, then cut it and trim it, and remove it from the wound, and turn your hand over and over, until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep it from being cut, for if it is cut, and it cannot be sewn or lifted, it harms the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have treated it all, put on the wound the fine hair of the plague with wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and keep it until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the wound is tight and twisted and assembled, and it is not straight, as we have said, then if you cut it roughly, but do not cut it straight,
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then it will be like we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron that is cut when the vein is cut, and it does not cut too much, so as not to cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is a large spider's web, because if it were small, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein of the arm.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is ensnared in limbs, in hot parts or no herbs or trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it naists another part than in limbs, and there comes a scurf that comes from the hide, as if the snake's belly comes out and turns, ensnared between hide and char;
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	When the signs of the beginning of this wound are visible if it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, and like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head is opened, if you wrap it around a piece of plait from one and a half to two and a half inches long, and the noe, and leave the plait on the leg, and all times when it is not in its place, if you ensnare the plait and the noe;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, if a part of it is cut off, and it wraps around the remaining part, and does not cover its root as much as it has come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	If you cut it off, it will enter the chest, and bring forth pus and filth or blood, and serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For that reason, it is necessary that it be treated quickly and often, and nothing or a little remains of the head.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And there is no time for this vein when it is treated with your hands of one to ten, or more, and some have come to me, from which it was ten, and if you cut it, if blood comes out, and the wound is not closed, then everything will be lost.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter that is densified be seen, and apply the medicines to the skin without any food for one day, then the cure is done as with the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never have hands rain on this vein, and at the same time when it opens in the joint or the other, and then comes out with pain, and which drops rain;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat the wound as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of verses that are born between leather and skin
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "beef disease," because it often happens to cattle, and is a sharp pain that runs between the skin and the bone, and goes up and down the entire body, and is felt all over the limbs as long as the hide remains on the bone or is removed, and jumps;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is caused by excessive humor of certain substances, such as worms, snakes, and leeches, or intestines.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And one wonders about its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it enters the brain, by chance it comes out, and destroys the brain.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and drawn out, if not possible when it will be.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If it comes to pass that you lie the leg down and out of a tight wound well, then pull up and cut it, and turn it in front in the chariot, and you do not sew it, if the cauterization by fire is done, as long as it burns;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm he can do, if he cuts the oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see him coming or approaching the oil, he will forcefully cut it off, then pull it out, and cut it off.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And it is necessary to use the physician's hands to dissolve the powders of liquid medicines for the human body, and to avoid eating fatty foods for nourishment.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from winding
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "wakiri" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to no part of the body, but spreads from one part to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And I see what you have said.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a female patient, and I saw her arm, and I saw a small pimple in the vein of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And afterwards, I saw it growing faster than anything, as if it were live silver when cut from the bone.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain left that bone, and it twisted in the shoulder, and then a little later, it curved throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that it twisted in front of the body, just as I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvel at how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wished for this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Indeed, I wanted to make sure that she wanted to move the pain from one bone to another, but I could not do it, as I see in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	I thought it was because the woman had loose hair, and the veins were exposed, and for that this restraint appeared necessary.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	It did not occur to me that this reasoning was not applicable to those who have loose hair and veins returned.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	When you see the cure of this disease, and the patient feels the pain, should it open as we have said, if the joint does not move much, and then cut as far as that restraint is necessary at the shoulder;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the shoulder.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of this which causes the restraint is like pills, and pills of sassafras, and similar things;
des saiettes	The term "des saiettes" translates
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The sails are various, depending on their appearances and the wounds of the body or they choke.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of its kind is that it has some with large points, and small ones, and hairs, and sores.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those with double angles, and of those with long tongues, and of those where it has pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which does not fit in any member, but fits in two ways.
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or if it has hairs in the principal member, like the head, liver, spleen, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	If it does not fit in any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears, you will know.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it happens that you resist the extraction of this arrow, because the death comes after in many attempts.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when you see that it does not seem to be hurting, and the arrow is not hurting in front, then cut it off, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of a fractured skull when the arrow pierces the bone is that it breaks and the head falls away, and the part where the skull was is dark, and there is scotomy and soreness and swelling and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of the cole.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and by chance it lacks nose or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance the word and voice are lacking;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and a jump of the white moist wound resembling a frog's, and similarly like a horse's snort;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign appears, if you hold the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in;
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it is pulled out or cut is that it is near the left cheek, and it feels as if it has been struck with a hard object, but not seen;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow is quiet like a frog's, and in dark red blood, and comes cold and very cold, and sinks:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The patient does not doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arm that is not moving is that there are no signs of inflammation from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the face turns pale, and he gasps for air and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrowhead enters the shoulder blade, it may damage the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and suffocation.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and they move all the limbs of the shoulder.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the dislocated shoulder is the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound, nothing indigestible of the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the dislocated shoulder is the belly, and in a single jump through the small intestine, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead enters the bladder, and the urine is ejected in a sudden gush and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	The wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if the face, neck, shoulder, spine, shoulder blade, back, and muscles, and the limbs appearing similar, are only according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the flesh or artery, and it is not exiting, as I will tell you if I can, because you are making such a face.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	I have seen a man with an arrowhead that was shot into the shoulder bone.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to remove it, and from another side, I removed some fat from the ear, and it was not very painful.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And then to a game a arrow that fell in the grease of the olive oil soaked the paper soaked, and the arrow was replaced, and it could not reach but only to the tip towards the enemy, and it was the arrow very large like a Turkish bow, at all I made it light weight for the ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And if the patient is healthy, and no accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And then to an arrow in the throat of a Crestian, and it was the Arabian arrow for the ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I knew the barbs, and very subtle when I passed it, and it was healthy for the Crestians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And there was a wound on his shoulder, which was swollen or bloated, and he thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then if it did not change its position within XXX days,
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I dressed the wound, and stitched it, and the patient left, and there was no further complication.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if a man has a wound on his shoulder or back, and the wound is infected,
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and did not heal the wound, and did not maintain its natural position, and did not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if another man has a wound on his face, and the wound is infected,
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	It takes a long time to endure great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	and there are other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And once a arrow was removed from the arm of a king's son, who had it stuck in his flesh and it was slanted to the left side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was fully removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for the treatment after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If you find the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried to remove it with all my skill and did not feel any pain.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a sharp and painful sensation in his left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was the tip of the arrow that I touched with my tongue, because he did not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw the lesion of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I pressed the injured hand, and closed the wound on the right side, and it took a long time for the patient to feel the pain in his limb;
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied the medicine for the wound, which was overturned, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow that was embedded in the shoulder.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I closed the wound with the corrosive medicine, as the head of the arrow was visible to me.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And it takes well for the end to last for four months, and then it is exhausted if the wound that I have closed with nails is not healed by both sides, and cannot be cured.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I did not stop refining and engineering ways of extraction, as soon as I took it with well-made nails, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, as I treat the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	Therefore, I restored it, and it was sore from the wound, and the pain of the patient was relieved.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or I said the quality of extracting some arrows, if you apply your care to what I shall tell you, for the books cannot make everything look perfect.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the skilled masters compere well with a few great things, and with what is present and lacking, true nine operations, and seven instruments, at the descent of things strained which come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are made flat according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the hand or they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which comes through the eye or it enters, is an arrow that enters into the flesh, and it has never been dislodged once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, if it leaves it as is when the char is entirely burned and becomes unpleasant;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot be removed if left alone for any length of time, and each joint must be moved;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and therefore it jumps, and if it does not jump now, if it is pierced through at all points, as long as the char is sharpened, and then it will be drawn out;
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the side, and it will come out through one of the bellies of the liver, or some other accidents that I have mentioned to the surgeon:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If it is not burned, but left as it is, as long as it is even after several days, for if the arrowhead comes out too soon, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the dislocation is not caused by the bone alone, and does not cause any other injuries, and the patient has had no previous accidents, then the surgeon should intervene.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it becomes very thick and cannot be extracted further, if the patient is in serious condition, as I have said.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead is returned to the shoulder, and if one cannot see it, if they wish for all of it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, if there is no instrument that can be removed.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you do not feel it because of the wound, and the arrowhead is not removed, if the patient suffers greatly when the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	When you cut the tendon, and if it has ears in the tendon, then if the bone that is marked with II part of the muse where you cut it, and then break or crush the ears of the tendon as much as you can.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And carefully, even if you do not break the tendon, you should pull it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not do it once, if the bone is still wet until it is read, then pull it out, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the dislocation comes out of place, and it does not return to its original position, then you should not do what we have said in this chapter for the cure.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And you should be warned of the incision on the nerve and the vein, and put in an emergency situation where you can cut the tendon safely, either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	The patient should be placed in the form it was before the injury occurred, as this is the greatest help to him. And if you do not want to do this, then he will be placed according to the sign that shows you what to do.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The injury comes from another side, or the patient has not opened anything of his own, or the skin is swollen in some place that can be seen or felt.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	The wound should be opened as much as possible so that the thorns can take hold, and then it should be extracted.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If the pain is now intense.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If the bone is held in place, if the hand turns around as it enters the bone, until it expands the bone, then it should be pulled out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be removed, then leave it alone and then continue the extraction as soon as it hurts again.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	If the wound is from an arrow, it is cut open and cleaned; if it is not infected, it will heal. However, if there is doubt or fear, many die.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	If the wound is deep, and you see instruments being administered, if the tip of the arrow enters the handle of the instrument, it should be removed immediately.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If the wound is further deepened, and the tip of the arrow enters the handle of the instrument, it should be removed immediately to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrowhead is lodged, then you must remove the entire shaft or the venom if it is still inside. Then, treat the wound as best as you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	If the wound is in the chest, abdomen, or groin area, and it has healed, if it becomes inflamed, apply a poultice.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	Et keep the vein and the nerve, then extract it, then close the wound, and make sure it's done properly.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat it as soon as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the arrowhead's points used to treat wounds is similar to the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are several ways to do it.
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the wound.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed hair is similar to that of an owl's beak, by inserting it at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown in this figure:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tines for insertion and removal is similar to this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Veins that are healthy are XXXI, but if there are XVI, it means:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two bands that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herb" chambers.
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	And the two arteries that appear in the two temples.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two wounds that are in the two eyes of the two hairs, which are called "aspirations
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the wound that is in the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the wound that is at the top of the head.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two girdles which are off.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the wounds that are in the lips of the mouth, which are called "angleworms".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the wounds that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The wounds that are commonly known to be five in each arm.
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the temporal wound, which is on the left side of the cheek, and it is called the "temporal wound" by the people.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the dislocation is called "fast" and is composed of the cranial and basilar parts, and they call it the "vein of the joint" in common language.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And if the basilar part is on the west side, and they call it the "vein of the abdomen" in common language, and it is located under the muscle, and it is the one that opens manifestly into the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvage vein is the one between the auricular and the anular vein, and if it rains.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	And in the leg, there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is the vein that is opposite the coronary artery and the pouch of the left side of the chest, and the second one is the vein that is at the ankle of the right side of the chest.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "cesna", which is on the other side of the ankle.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg, there are three veins different from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears if helped by old catheters and removals.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the quality of the veins that is, as I say, and it is that you rotate the head of the patient and rub the leg or the veins are of a rough fabric.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then the patient's neck becomes red, as long as the two veins are visible behind the ears in the two legs depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	1. "If you feel the knot tightening, and if you feel pain in your shoulder, then loosen it.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	2. "Then take the scalpel, and cut through the vein as close to the bone as possible, then gently hold the vein with your hand all along it, and compress and squeeze the area until you see enough blood, then stop the bleeding as much as you can.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	3. "Then hold the wound closed until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	4. "I have already said the incision and cauterization or first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	5. "The health of the two arteries in the temples, if they are old and dry, and hard, and have become accustomed to the corse of the tears, then let them be removed.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and you judge its health if it is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the patient pulls on his chest, as long as the eyes open widely.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pain in your belly, and then signs of distress.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then gently press on the vein at the top of your belly, and remove the lancet, and gently press on the vein and the wound, as you have done in the other two veins, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then loosen the belt, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then you form a poultice, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, or beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the forehead is as valuable as that of the head's cranium for ancient diseases of the face and migraines, and wounds.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is that the patient pulls his neck with force while the forehead is exposed.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "forceps," whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the forehead, and hold it firmly with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then the surgeon cuts the shoulder collarbone, and the vein is tied as soon as it is sound and never once with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it only requires the flame to be too hot.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the wound is safe because the bone is close, and by chance the flame breaks when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The safety of the two veins that are in the two arms is helpful for the wounds, and the tongue, and the gums, and the mouth, and diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their safety if the patient suffers from pain when pulling his shoulder by twisting any limb, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then comes the correct way, and it is the straight path, a small gap, a wide one, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is subtle, by chance it may be broken.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make a clean cut, as much as you are able, and then sew it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The correct way of the vein is not always true, and can also be dangerous, and other diseases of the face, such as scarring and wounds that come with age, and especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of the wound if it is the patient's skin that is strained, then press the neck with your left hand, and take the subtle flame, and close the eye in the space between the two eyes, because the vein does not open well, and now it will start to cut.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not alert too much, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need, then let it rest a night as it is most restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	and this salve is useful for the relief of headaches, and at the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for eczema, and corrosions, and herpes, and boils:
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the salve is that if the patient pulls on his neck with both hands, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master being above the patient's shoulder, and the patient being on his side, then draw out the vein widely, then cut it with a sharp knife, as much as possible according to your skill:
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then, I did another part in the other vein, then removed the ligature, and stretched the veins slightly, so that the patient's pain would not increase.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips of the deer if they help to close in the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, and cracks of the lips, and sores and throat.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And judge the health of the patient if it is necessary to tie the gauze in front of you, and stretch the neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the cheek, and look at the veins, one of which is on the left cheek and the other on the right, and you can distinguish them by their color and because they are thin and dark-colored.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	1. If you do not know how to do it, and you are in doubt, then try the largest one of each part, and make as many incisions as possible, because this is a different method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	2. If the tongue is injured after the head is treated, and it is at the throat, and there are diseases of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	3. And if the patient is healthy, and the patient has fallen between your hands before the sun, and you touch the tongue, and look into each corner of a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	1. If done correctly on both sides, and not too forcefully, as the arteries are small.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	2. The veins that are usually cut are healthy in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	3. either by pricking at every part of the flame, or by making a small cut, and are called "anethums";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	4. and are wide and thin according to the widening and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the burned face is such that it is not named, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	5. and has skill in opening flat veins with large clots of blood, and those that contain large clots and trouble.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	6. and it is the form of the small arterial cut:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle applied, and it is safer for the subtle veins, or if there is subtle citrin sang in them.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The health of the basilican vein, which is one of these veins, if it helps with diseases that are deosy the throat, and the collar, and the belly, and the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the patient to take advice and avoid the artery that is deosy.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he presses the artery, and the blood comes out, then it is necessary to stop the pain, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it should not be too many pricks of the flame, but trimmed as possible.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilican does not open clearly, then it is necessary to hold it and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	If you do not want any rain from it, or if you are healthy in the vein of the arm, take the bone out.
elle apert manifestement;	It is open clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the forceps at the fire, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the bone of the limb, then it is necessary that you hold the arm and touch the bone as much as you can feel the pulsation.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the bone and then hold the arm and cut the vein with a hot forceps.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the bone enflame, because it is the artery.
eschui la donques.	The patient must let the hair grow long and even for the fire cautery.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	If you see coming out of the top like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, it is without arteries.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Do not dislocate the shoulder, and hold your hand far away, then observe if it does not move unsteadily, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	If you pull on the arm and let go, and do not move the patient's shoulder.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and hold it steady until it is safe.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	If it does not become unstable, and you become weary, and the physician is not present, then if the artery is open, because the head of the shoulder will return.
et estainche li sans.	and it is painful for him.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a scalpel, and cut, and then take one of the halves and tie it well to the other side.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if it is painful for him, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, if the remedy helps to alleviate the pain, as we have said, with powders that relieve pain.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the pain relievers are not often used in other positions for the small part of the wound, and the relief of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The health of the vein in its environment is aided when it treats sanguineous pain and corporeal distress, because it is composed of basilica and cerebral, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	It is necessary for the healer to sew for the nerve that is cut, and if it is not too far, and it is closed, and it swells and the health becomes weak, and by chance it cannot be healed.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this cut nerve opens many times, and if it does not open by any means, then it is necessary to sew with the old instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And you should examine the nerve in your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is blood flowing between the two veins, if it is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the head helps, which draws blood to the head and helps the limbs.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to heal by pricking with the olive or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all wounds, because it does not cut the nerve or the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	1. All ways, it is necessary to make the joint more flexible, and do not cause pain for the first time, and one resumes.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	2. And by chance, some people find that their joints become more flexible, but it does not cause pain the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your perception.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	3. The first thing you should know for health, if it is healthy, is not to spoil it by keeping it in good condition and avoiding diseases coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	4. And make the health in one of the three veins that are cut:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	5. That is to say, cephalic, fasten, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be healthier at the beginning of prayers, and in turn, and in yoga after mixing, when the sign of fullness appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And it should be healthier on the first day or the second, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The health that is maintained with diseases has no fixed duration, but when the patient is in bed or out of bed, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary for the children to be healthier than fourteen years old, and for women who carry no more than a quarter of a month after the ninth month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Necessity does not apply to those who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when some appear healthier, in whatever way that may be, if it comes to causing the intestines of a light child to become distended, if there is a lot of feces retained, then the veins do not have unnecessary intestines that are harmful to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Neither is it healthy for a child who eats too much meat, nor for one who is drunk, as long as there are no hydropaths.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one becomes sicker after a passionate colic, vomiting, abdominal dislocation, and many women's menstruation, and labor pains, and waking and eating, and whatever strength, or by something of the arm or deep cord;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then, subtly the humors, if it is not large, by meat and drink and medicines, you can do it if you have them.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then, if you enter a bath, nothing will help, by subtly the humors, and you will become healthy from the vein until the third day, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep you safe from work, pain, luxury, and such things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be united and joyful, and be healthier than what we heal, and rub the arm two or three times, then stretch the ligament in a straight line because if it is too tight or short, you cannot correct it without;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	Then the physician examines the patient's arm with their hands, as long as the veins throb, and they feel it.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then the physician moistens the cleaner with a little oil, then places her left hand on the vein of the patient's arm, as far as she can reach, so that the vein does not bleed. The vein does not hurt.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that feel like cords to the physician, and if they are so tight, then they are easily compressed by pressure, so that when one places the cleaner at the vein, it retreats from the vein and cannot be opened, and then it is this one.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	If the vein is pricked, and the wound is too tight, for it is necessary that the surgeon be informed in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein is pricked for the first time, it's nothing.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, then after a short while, if the shoulder does not return to its original position, it is twisted.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	If the shoulder is twisted, and the patient becomes unconscious, leave it alone for one or two hours, and do not tighten the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	by chance, and gangrene attacks the member.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	and do not enter water, then return to health if it pleases you.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	When the wound is small, or if it is not cut subtly and you doubt that it does not have much blood, then you fear that there is not as much blood in that wound as you see, so proud in that wound itself to all the flame fairly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And the patient's strength is slight, unless it is deformed.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound swelling, if you do not renew the cleanliness, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the skin of the blood, and it is dried in this wound the oil that is on it;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And then apply oil to each clean wound that you clean the veins, to reinforce the course of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And the same treatment is used for bowels and guts when it is placed on the leg;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If the skin is not removed and spreads when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there are many abscesses that come often, as soon as it is only healthy when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put a damp sponge on the wound, and tighten for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	It is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it does not move at the shoulder after any time without darkness or discoloration, unless it is known otherwise.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, do not put any aloe or re- inserted in the juice of aloe, mustard, or like.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there is postmortem and appearance at the health of the basilica.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And then place your hand on it, and if it is not appearing well with the compression of the hand, it is.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	I advise you that you do not put anything of this that we have said, for by chance without the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each sore according to its quantity of virtue and color of the sore.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	If the wound is bleeding, then leave it to bleed until it turns red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see large blood clots, then let them be until they become small.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too cold, then leave it to cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for those who are in pain and fear, to have the skill of extracting blood. Then make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it will be healthier and more often, and they should be treated by cutting across, without touching;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healing is saved from the collapse of blood and the weakness of the nerve, and it is worth noting that the longer the joint is, the wider it is.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for those whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give thin bread in the juice of green apples.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is scorched, if the blood is drawn three or four times, or if it has a cold complexion, if the bread is mixed with thin juice before the healing, or with honey syrup or aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, nutmeg, ginger, and cloves, and well-odored honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If the patient feels ill after the evacuation of blood, if it is wet and has a pungent odor, and if other things are used as we have said in the division or chapter of sincope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he sees his arm swell and become healthier again, if it happens, when he is deprived of sufficient health, so that he becomes healthy little by little, according to the amount of his virtue that continues.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If he sees his arm swell after the first health, and if he is strong, if he becomes healthy within seven hours after the first health, or after the next hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one appears healthier on another part, then it must be healthier the next day or the following.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has an excess of blood from the body that is already tired, and brings on fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it comes to draw out a large amount of blood, and clean the wound as much as possible.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then, since you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the wound as soon as it is healthy, so that the death does not occur in the wound of pus, and this often happens when the healthier ones are neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And you do not have to wait when you see the arm ooze blood, and make it bleed again, and the wound is closed, so that you press on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is not broken, extend the arm gently, for it would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But let it remain for the second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Or you do not point the fire at the tip of the flame, as it will freeze at the vein's exit and then place it back in boiling water, and gently press it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, if it is left without being tightened and not stretched as much as possible until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in the other hand.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is composed of the bone.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to make it clean if the patient burns his hand in hot water, as long as the color is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then tie it loosely, if the vein appears well, then the wound is now through, do not make it too wide or too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the wounds be wide, and be well close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if this is not possible, then put the hand in hot water, as it will be more in verve than in this state.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The health of this wound is better than all others, as it has neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the saved hand of the right hand is better than all diseases of the stomach, and it is this way.
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	1. To hold back the hand, and cut with a hot iron, as long as the vein is bare, if it can be reached.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	2. And if it is not cut straight, and you cover it completely, if it does not hurt at all.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	3. And do not force it too far, because the flesh is all raw and cold, and then put the hand back on the hot iron, if the wound does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be moved.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated enough blood as your skill allows, if you put the vein oil and seal it firmly, and then make a knot for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient's hand that holds the remedy is most suitable for treating mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said for the other hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The remedy of the soap is suitable for all diseases that are unpleasant to the body, such as diseases of the lungs, retention of fluids, and disease of the legs, and old wounds, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	4. And if the quality of his health is such that he cuts with hot iron and frets the vein as it becomes bare, and then cleans the joint affected by pain.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And if the vein is at the ankle, and due to pressure from the foot it starts to swell.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	If the swelling is small or large at the ankle, it is not good.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you have swelling at the foot, if there are nerves that are exposed, and it is painful to walk, as it is to cross a bridge.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the old veins be severed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you cannot have children from your beloved spouse, and the wife is pregnant again, and the wound of the vein is well-healed; then leave the vein alone.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the swelling returns for the second time, if it is only a small amount, because the foot is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and I will make a poultice of the other foot in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The first line of the translated text is: "The pain in the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its cure is in the relief of the toothache, when it is due to blood evacuation.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And judge the quality of his health if he is in cold or bath, and draws out of the ankle IV when twisting, because otherwise it will not open the vein.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it is opened, whether the patient is healthy in all ways that you can think of, and through.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worth copying if the patient understands it, as it is written, and it is returned to the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not copy, whether the patient is healthy in no way that has been opened or done, and to the small door, and it will give you some nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And make as much evacuation of blood as you see, and then release the limb, and put on cotton and tighten.
ele est maintenant sanee.	The patient is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of childbirth pains
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Suction devices are made of horn, or iron, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And suction is performed in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suction, which is made by cutting, is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is totally burned, or by fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And this suction, which is made by cutting and extracting blood, is done in twelve hours of the day, with some being all the same, while others are different.
et li autres est emmi le col;	And the other is removed from the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two more in the other shoulder;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suture of the corner;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suture of the two shoulder blades;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suture of the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the sutures of the elbows;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the sutures of the legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the sutures of the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suture does not touch any vein, only thin wounds that are scattered throughout the chest, and therefore it is not able to cause harm, as we do with a wound;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is necessary that it be maintained, neither too much nor too little fire, in no disease that comes from excess, as long as the heart remains whole;
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessity of diseases comes to visit, or by habit, if the midwife visits each hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and also in every ten;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they have to visit, have heavy burdens;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And if there are those who, when they come to visit, have fullness and inflammation in their face, in their cheeks, and in their neck, and pain in their limbs;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who come to visit with a fever in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	If they have such wounds that prick, and see blood and pus and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and also when it is mid-month, we order them to rest after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the patient is aided by the girth of the belt... that comes as it does to the wounds, and it can only be after the evacuation of all the blood.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventilation is in the head of the patient's health, and it can only be when it is used for a cold complexion or if it has charcoal, because this does great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and that's why the physician only uses it when he has cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often become ill, then become obligated, and therefore it is necessary to shorten the rest period due to the fear of obedience.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The first line of the text translates to: "The ventilation of the chest is in the neck of the healthy cord and for this reason it is in the relief of the bronchial cough, and also for the fever and the sore throat, and for all the inflammations.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The second line translates to: "And it is recommended to bind it tightly, because if it is too tight, it can cause discomfort in the stomach or abdomen.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The third line translates to: "The ventilation of the collarbone is in the neck of the healthy spine and for this reason it is in the relief of the headache, and also for the toothache and strangulation, and for the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the neck of the healthy spine.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is necessary that you command the surgeon to express his hand when putting it, so as not to cut the artery, and to avoid further damage to the wound.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The windings of the gums do not reach the disease of the mouth, and the corruption of the genitals, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is in the lips of the dry lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The cold and wetness of the shoulder joint causes inflammation and swelling, which can lead to serious health problems if not treated immediately. The affected area must be treated promptly to prevent further complications.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The windings of the cheeks are as much as three fingers of the arms, because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the surgeon not to cut too much in front, because the patient's face is naked and does not know how to cut nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The suction that is used at the groin if it causes pain and other diseases, and it is necessary that the suction be large and deep, with a stone-like texture, capable of properly drawing.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it is too fine, it may break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The suctions on the legs are healthy and open, as they draw blood from all parts of the body, and relieve old pains of the thighs, uterus, bladder, and vulva, and draw out the hairs.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are on the thighs of the second feet, and the calves, and they all make the body weaker after long use, and cause pain in more positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	1. The manner of inserting the vacuum is to first empty it, and then place it firmly, and move it evenly, and continue doing this until you see the red and swollen part, and the appearance of pus.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	2. Then, clean them, and put the vacuums back in their place, as some have such severe pain and difficulty:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	3. If it is necessary to cut once only, and make wide wounds, and a proper size:
et suce legierement.	4. and gently suck:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	5. And if it is not big, and they cut twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to subtly cut the vein of great blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it is not very fast, then it is likely to injure the third time.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we try to draw out little blood at a time, we only succeed once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we try to draw out much blood, we often return.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if it is not very fast, then it is better to stop and finish it if the patient's pulse is clearly felt, and those who have thick skin and are durable, and those who have rough edges, you should apply the ointment of opening and dissolving oils from the ointment of the oil openers.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is made from olive oil, or honey-sweet almond oil, or sunflower seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is made from vegetable oil, such as mustard oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar oil.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take olive oil, or balsam of Hermas, or olive oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is healthy and has large pores, it should not be oiled, but it should be washed after the application of vinegar of rose, or cold vinegar, or mushroom vinegar, or vinegar of porcelain, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have moisture in their mouth, if they rise from silk, or vinegar of mustard, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive superfluities rise from wine vinegar, or ague of seuc, or decoction of anet or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not recommended to vinegar before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	For do not sleep after ventilation, and it is necessary that it wakes up when it should ventilate and when it is ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And if the healthy one is cold, and the unhealthy one is too hot and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it comes that he eats cold things, like lettuce and endive and spinach in milk, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and consume puddings, and hot cheese, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And if the one with a cold complexion eats honey syrup, and aromatic wine that is between winter and spring, and consumes little, and consumes puddings and thin soups and pies.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	When the joint is dislocated, if it needs to move more than a finger's width, it must be reset.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	It is necessary to give certain people one time of triaicle or muscate before the dislocation, or afterward, to comfort the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	It is necessary to be subtle with the joint, but only those who are able to bear the pain should be dislocated.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The vents that are felt to be painful are those that are placed on the stomach, and on the thighs, and gout, and on the abdomen, and the bowels, and the rains, and the hainche, because this member does not suffer from pain in other parts, and only when it is attracting pain from one part to another, as we do with our breasts when they are sick.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	For the viscosity that is in the member, if we suck out the abdomen and the belly with cups to relieve the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And reduce the pain when it is inflamed or pierced, if by its virtue it attracts the inflammation, or if it leaves the pierce of the member.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And this is done when it is hung up in the belly and the mouth when it has inflammation retained, and these cups are administered empty by sucking only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And no time are they administered together with fire, and no time are they plained with cold tea, as in many diseases that cause the eyes to water, and in this way we fill the cup with hot water, or with water that has been boiled herbs, which are edible.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum device administered by fire is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half palm-sized poles, and it has either cost as much as a thousand pennies, or less if the patient is small; so that it can be inserted like a needle, and it is made of steel, smooth in front so that it does not cut the helper's hand when putting it on the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and in the environment, a wire of cross-grain steel or iron, to be held by a chisel, and it is large and small according to the diseases and the pain of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the bellies of children are not like knives, nor thin as fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And it must be placed on this ventouse on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	The cauterization candle or ointment should be applied, and it should be placed on the ventouse through the hole that is on the ventouse, so that the fire does not reach the inside of the ventouse and burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then it should be placed on the member, and you must see if the wound is as we have said, so that if you see vapor coming out, and then remove the ventouse.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And apply the ointment as before, and repeat it often, if you have the skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the ventouse that is in the patient with the disease of pleurisy, at any age, there is no hole or wound, and it is not infected unless it is only when it is clear of fever and is placed on the member only.
et c’est li forme:	1. "And it is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without being stretched, they are not broken except in the limbs where it is not possible to put a ventouse due to their small size, like the lips and genitals, and similar ones.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in them of cartilage, if like two or three, and other similarities.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user if it is that when you find dislocations that are in soft waters and have a clear sensation of movement, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in soft water as they are related, and have no belly.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then clean the vein and the wound, then rub the limb as much as it is red, and put on the dislocations.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	When they are flat, smooth, and well-placed, if it is the shoulder or arm that can be splinted, it is placed there, as this is best.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the shoulder, and then the elbow, well, and then straighten it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	If it is too late in the case of cold wrists, if the linen is too wet, then spread it out on a cool surface, and leave it until the wrists are not swollen.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	If the swelling increases, then put on vinegar or hot irons, and similar things, as long as it is not too much.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	If you cut half of the fevered limbs, and leave them as they are until they cool down on the limb, it will now be still.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more of them, take others that are fresher.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the wounds do not take the cloths, take the flesh of the limb freshly cut, or thrust a needle into it as much as it pains, and then insert them, and as they feel the warmth, they will cool down.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them bleeding, if you powder some aloe and silk, or some charcoal, they will stop bleeding now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of wounds.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it treats of wounds and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	1. "If you are seeking knowledge about this chapter, it is not found in any ancient books, nor does any letter contain it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	2. "And for this reason, the science is lacking in our land, as I have never found any book.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	3. "And I do not know anything about it, because through the science of ancient books, I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by my habit in life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	4. "And I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the stumps that are amputated, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say this is the introduction of this book, the words and chapters, and the patient understands them, and learns the truth, if those who have experienced it can teach and learn this noble art, and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or twisting comes to any part of the body, if you hurry to heal the patient's shoulder from both sides, nothing will fail, as weak as it may be, whether from cold, children, or wounds.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	unless you tighten it not very tightly, or too loosely.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and do not use cold things, such as ice and hazelnut, and do not drink wine, nor use thin charcoal, and do not fill the veins with blood too much when you have no doubt of gangrene or expansion of matter in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient reviews the treatment they used at their first government.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the meat that causes great swelling, or if there is viscosity, like wheat cooked in hot water, and tests, and pies, and pancakes made of wool, and cheese, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the swelling that is recovered, the fracture gets worse and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you know that bones and joints broken cannot be well repaired or mended according to their nature due to the lack of members, nor those that are too soft, such as small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone and large tendons that are pulled and joined together as much as possible, just as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and not to leave the work undone, and for this reason it is recommended to avoid large meals, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	The treatises of the physicians declare that there are many ways to break bones.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the arm or leg, and I will tell you all the ways of fracturing in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that occurs when falling, and another when struck, like the size of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to have his engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes to his memory in his head.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known as the fracture of the bone because the bone is twisted, and it is well-apertured by itself, and some by pressure of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when it does not have knots and is at the tip, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may have knots, or a cut, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you can only move it with your hand, but put the medicine that comes after, and then pull it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you suspect that the fracture will be in the joint, and the two parts are dislocated, then you must now correctly align them, unless they cause death.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if they are spasmed and come, then leave it alone as long as the spasm is calmed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then place it evenly in the muscle that you can lightly and wisely, and soothe that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of cells or if there are pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then pull it, as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if it is in the bone with broken pieces, if you stretch it by two parts, it is hands or fingers, or at your hand it is some small members, or at the cords, or at one cord and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural shape, if by the parts of the broken member they are out of place, then reset them by using your fingers in the muscle that you can, and keep in mind that by your own hand does not come to the patient's pain or injury.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And carefully adjust the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	If it feels good in your hand, even if it seems not to be well.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it grows well, and does not strain too much, do not press as they do who come by their incision and contraction to the member, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is in its place, if the surgeon handles it well so that it does not move, neither by day nor by night, nor turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And make sure that the member is well secured so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, if it is not so, and it is necessary to put him in part of the body that does not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep him in place, so that twists do not come when he returns to it.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I say.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I advise that the broken member is various in smallness and in size and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For he has many limbs, which are divided and treated in the same way:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	if it is necessary to wrap them with linen cloths and fine threads.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, like how a knee is treated.
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	if it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard linen, because the large bandages cover all the limbs, and they are tightened evenly, so that there is no swelling.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then lie the entor is lightly bound with three or four turns, according to the member, and your hand is held tightly along the entire line, then go to the end of the fracture and it is tightened less than the fracture, which the fracture slightly moves away from the fracture;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the member a little and a little, as you grip a large part of the healthy shoulder, then take another line, and turn the entor upright on the broken member;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part opposite the fracture, and tighten it gently, do not pull too hard or too loosely, as we have said in the first line of this chapter;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place the threads between the stitches of linen or drapes, as they are equal, then tie them with silk and braid, and then put your well-made ends on, if there is no hemorrhage or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or hemorrhage, then put on something soothing for the hemorrhage and stopping the swelling, and leave it alone for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then tighten your ends, and they should be of about one-third of a wide, sharp knife, or of wheat, or of dates, and they should be like this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the one who sets the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also be of the same length as it is required for the member, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then tighten the bandage as you did in the first attempt, then tie a thread around it, as you did in the first attempt.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	The more tightly it is wrapped, the less it is.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is necessary that the thread be smooth, not too thick or too thin, and be of linen thread.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the thread is too thick, it is like the work of the fingers who make the laces of linen threads, and it is a great error, because the bandage cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it only needs that there is less space between each stitch than the thickness of the lace.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is cut by the sharp edges of the stones after being washed with water, if they are not covered with linen or cloth, so that they do not freeze.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the tweezers, and the hair is broken, I will tell you the treatment for this after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should not try to pull out all the broken bones at once, as it is dangerous.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, it is not recommended to use these tools that are later than V years or VII, or according to the strength of your aposteme.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and then the manner of ancient splints to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and is that you take flour that is found in the mill's walls, mix it with a large amount of water, and make this concoction, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method for restoring fractures in other positions, as well as for women and children, because it is neither too wet nor too dry.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way to mend fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Prepare a mixture of oak bark, linen, and animal glue, mixed with Arabic gum, and add water in the ratio of 1:10.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mash and aloe, in the ratio of 1:2.
alechil VIIII З.;	Add alochil in the amount of 78%.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make a powder, and mix with egg whites.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the complexion of the face is hot, then use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Other ways of measuring than by twist:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take a measure and a caliper, at least 10 centimeters;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	mark and incise, at least 7 centimeters;
acaice VI З.;	according to the size of the patient's hand;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	mix with arsenic X, and cook well, and add water or urine of the patient, and administer;
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Other ways of measuring joints and bones of the limbs, and alleviate pain, and the size is according to the bone, and fracture:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take new cloth, and the oil in alcohol and cooked, and put on the limb;
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore flesh, but it is necessary to soothe the post-surgical pain and the true bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of splinting that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves, and earth oak leaves, and mix them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make plasters for the repair of bone fractures and to help with the recovery of post-surgical pain.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, and a portion of flour from each.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and mix with wine, and apply to the affected parts, and moisten with rose water or vinegar, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	2. Another way to apply it more frequently than the first, when the wound is firm, comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take the roots of valerian, linen seeds, mustard, honey, and a portion of each flower: violets and chamomile.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and mix with salt water or sweet vinegar, or with wine, according to the condition of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that it is not recommended to apply anything on the broken bone to restore its strength, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too wet nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen suggests that on the broken bone to restore, one should apply things like dry and warm substances such as mustard and aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Other ways to mark injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take fingers and toes of the opposite hand, or hairs of the head, and nails, and cut them evenly, and the skin, and then make a mark.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then leave a small part afterwards, and take care not to hurt the patient's shoulder; if it does not move, do not move the bones of the shoulder.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not left by hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the shoulder, or itching, tenderness, or swelling, if you have time, and leave it, and then make the mark now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And gently unwrap it, and wet the mercury sponge, and dip it in cold water, and lift the leg up as much as the itch stops, and soothe the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the leg rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moisten it with cold water or olive oil, and tie it tightly, as long as you are sure of not having a pulse.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And reduce the inflammation of the leg, and soothe the pain, then resume gently wrapping it, and a little bit of ointment, and do not strain it too much like before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And gently as it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the wound is gushed with blood and there is pain and swelling, and it is inflamed all over, and you have skill in plastering and bandaging, if it recurs, as you did at first properly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the limb that we have said, if it does not slip after three days or four or seven or ten.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never more than twenty days, according to what is seen, as long as the fracture sets, and approaches the bone to the splint.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	However, more restraint than before, and it will increase its flesh, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb drying more than it should, advises that no herbs can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	When the fever rises, it often happens that you lose consciousness, and this happens every time, regardless of the type of day, and it lasts for a short while.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Due to this fever, the muscles in the limb are often injured, and they become weak, causing the member to be misaligned.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is harmful, and if it becomes more severe, I can only provide pain relief and advise proper treatment.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of wounds
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of wounds, and various shapes, and the causes are different.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are wounds that are caused by the impact of a spear, and the skin covers the entire bone, which is broken off from the bone, just like a hawk or a falcon.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For this reason, this method of fracture is called "hammering.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	The spear pierces the bone through various senses and is called this method of fracture "absolute.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And these are the wounds of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is a thrust embedded, or cut, or from the bone after the piercing, or from the other side of the piercing, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent fracture, which draws the skin that is loose from the bone, or it is under the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is healed in the bone as subtle as some chisels, and it is a small fissure, and for this it is called this fracture "capillary.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by cutting with a blade, or piercing with an awl, or seeming something else, and it lets the piece of bone enter, and it is the same as when they cut with hot iron when they forge the hammers;
si entre li piere dedens.	If it enters the piercing.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And furthermore, those who have been washed with wet water, like that of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and come in all these ways of fracture that are lightly broken if they were, so do these;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak to it in his shoulder;
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us consider all ways of fractures by the methods used for them, and by the corrupt char that is used.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one has discovered the bone, and froths with their hand, if the dark fracture is open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, keep in mind as many accidents as possible of the midwife, and if you see no such accident, then like vomiting of cold, admission of understanding, extension, flexion, congestion, fever, and the wounds turning red and swelling, and other symptoms in various dispositions, if it cannot be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the first pain comes to you, and it is in the shoulder, then it is necessary to stop the movement of the bone before the fourth month at the muse.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If this is the case, and you stop the movement of the bone before the ninth month, then the tendon of the bone will be corrupted, and the accident we have mentioned will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture comes near the girdle that encloses the collarbone, then you must cut off the damaged part;
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if you ignor the patient's pain and cut off the wet skin, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and reveal the wound more severe than you see, and if pus comes to cleanse the bone, or abscess ruptures, and you help it with what comes, and if you fill the shoulder with oiled flax;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	1. And make the wound rest as long as the inflammation is eased and it is assured of not dislocating.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	2. Then the bone begins to ossify, and it is made according to two methods of burning:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	3. One method is when you cut at the narrow end before, and it forms:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then, cut another piece of the same size as the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	4. And the second method is when you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	5. And in working lightly, so as not to blunt the blade:
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and thick, then it comes to pass that you percuss it with your hand, otherwise, if you maintain the edges with tapers, do not exceed the point of the bone, and it must have a margin or a circle that does not allow the point to pass over the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have more of them if many people come to their joints in the end of the bone, if you have tapers for your test.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three ways of tapers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality of percussing outside the broken bone is that you put the taper on the bone and turn it as much as necessary until you feel that the bone is perceived.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then, move the burn to another part a short while later, and then do everything thoroughly, then make the cuts into the bone that is between the holes, and do it more subtly than you please, and lightly, as we have said, as long as you take the bone out of your hand, or from any of the stirrups that you have, like nails, pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and make sure you do not touch the brain or the sweat.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone perceived and cut, if it comes that you cover the wound that is made in the bone with the other instrument as an incisor, but it should be more narrow and more subtle than the other incision.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	If there is no movement of the small bones, neither heavy nor light scales, if the lighter bones slightly move.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then, treat the wounds and injuries that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way of opening is when it is more difficult, which is the Galenic method.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the knife is very sharp, and that is its word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the open fracture is visible, so that when you have removed this part, if you measure from the top of this incision, the form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And does not cut too much on one side, and the other part is turned towards the bone, if it is being cut.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then, with a small cut, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and be careful not to hit the cloth that is soaked.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is at the bone, if it is lightly on the bone, for it is felt quite painfully, and causes great fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	When the bone fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only crushed by itself, and it has small pieces, if they cover the rough edges, and smooth the scales with a subtle rasping tool that you must have various quantities of, to adjust each joint according to the degree and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you shave in front of a coarse rasping tool, and then use a more subtle one, and continue doing this as much as it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair removal techniques and subtle wounds, it is necessary to follow their directions according to your needs.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	It is a matter that cannot be answered by anyone who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the scar is discovered, then it is necessary to apply flax to the wound according to its size, and grease with rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another doubled gauze, and grease it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first gauze.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you can, so as not to burn the skin, then apply with other means and do not strain it too much, only as far as the wound allows.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And leave it for one to two days, as long as the abscess is not suppurating, then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of various plants, flour, powdered frankincense, aristolochic acid, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And make powder from these things and apply it to the wound, and apply medicines without bitterness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	The wound should be cleaned well, so you do not put on any ointment, nor do you assemble bows, because when bows are assembled on the skin, it often causes great pain to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	When something sharp is put on the wound, it may cause the patient great pain.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Preparation is necessary, as no accidents come to the patient if we follow what we have said, if it is doubtful, then there is doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if nothing is coming out of the wound except for medicine, then you must apply a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and then put the sharp thing on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, apply the wound in various ways that are safe and healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	1. If no party of the shoulder ever breaks, whether one or both, for they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	2. And the other is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it is bowed or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	3. And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut the small dose or pertuss of the shoulder, and set the fracture at your index finger, and to the pouch as long as the bone does not return to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	4. And do this lightly, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the part of the toe that is not the big toe, and it cannot be brought to the heel, then you should put it as even as possible at the end of a thick finger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of the second part, then if you repair it again, you will have to restore the first joint, if you please.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, then after the ninth or tenth day, when the wound is healed and the stitches are removed, and the fracture is in one place, then proceed with the treatment.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you bind one or another part, if the fracture has;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and the bandages be so large that they fill the abscesses with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	2. And no restorer would say that one must soothe the wounds with butter, and each one will die.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It seems to me that this is well, but it is necessary that they be made in the fashion of oven-baked wheat and milled mill powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent, as long as the bone is frozen, and the cartilages harden.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never once do they put their geese's wings in the tent, and if it is loosely draped and stays in place, and blows the air among.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or make what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess forms at the site while you are working, and it comes to the point where you put on a cloth or cotton cloth greased with rose oil, or in a small vial of laver.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the wound does not ooze, then apply plaster made of flour and powdered frankincense, mixed with beef broth, then place light spoons, and do not tie them too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the wound is small and broken into thin pieces, and they are broken into pieces that can be easily managed with this, then cut the fringes, and the treatment of things enchanted charms, and soothing, if like plasters and ointments can be easily managed with this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound or small wound, if it heals, and it puts on bandages, as soon as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not deep, but only slightly so, and it is not broken into pieces, but rather bent slightly, which can be corrected with a slight effort.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the left side, that you cut your index finger in the mouth of the midwife.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then cut your index finger of the right hand, and lightly cut the fracture, and fix it with the other hand evenly, and hold.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	If the fracture of the lower jaw is described as Level II, and you intend to provide extension to the second part, as long as it is equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth move or fracture, if they are stretched from a gold or silver or silk thread, then put it on the broken jaw of the other side, and put two pieces of cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the wound a well-made cloth or a piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it around the neck that you choose, and instruct the patient to lie down and give them light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	If you see that the figure changes, if it is lifted up, and then set it back to where it was.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And apply a paste made of flour from the bolter with a lot of urine or bread flour, after you have opened the wound.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And apply the paste on a light cloth, and when it is dry, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times, it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the wound is infected, then it comes to the attention of the physician, as we have often said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, the reward is a small piece of bone in the cast.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If the osseous subtlety is easily covered by this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, it should be stretched according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all these pieces of bone, and there is none in vain, if the wound is wide, and it is large, and you put on flexible dressings, for mending it as much as possible, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	Of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The force breaks more times in front of, toward the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways.
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or it is broken and separated in two, and has pieces, and it is the lighter to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is a fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the operation is if the wound is as the fracture is with pain, that you have two assistants, if the one tint the helper that feels the forceful fracture.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and extend the other arm to the part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the wound equal to your two sides, if it forms as it should, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have more to extend, then place the shoulder bone of the patient away from the wound a round sphere made of linen or wool, and it should be large according to your need.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and gently apply the force, and pull the sphere to your hand so that you place the wound equally, if it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you do not take the head of the strong one away from its place, because it comes in front, then the patient will feel pain on their hateful side, and put their elbow or shoulder down, and bend the spine of the strong one as much as the bone of the strong one is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then attach the wound to your two sides, and if you have dislocated it, then it should be that you fix it back.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and take away the lighter pieces, and if the head cannot be joined by any means, if it is one of the ones you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you use the full force of this instrument to see if it will work:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and should be as wide as it is intended to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the will:
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and has two heads, if you see, and the larger ones are for larger wounds, and the smaller ones are for smaller wounds, according to the swelling of the wound you made when you treated the bones:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	When you are sure of the incision, if there is pain, and if the wound is small, or if you doubt the incision, if you use the wound with dressings and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	2. And if aphrodisiacs are used, and it comes, if much oil is needed, and linseed and mustard, and wine, and put on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The irritation of the bone is when it feels pain and tightness, it is that you apply to the bone the plaster of the ground and flour of oatmeal and a soft cloth, and a small amount of water, if you have the means.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very thick bandage from a palm leaf, then put the dough twice on the cloths, and apply it.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin needle of three inches in length and one inch wide, and wrap the thread around it, so that the knot is at the end.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	Then place the needle on the bracelet, turn the thread around the loop, and remove the healthy nail, and remove the sick nail.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	Then tighten each part, and when you see that the nail holds the bracelet firmly, and you see clearly that the thread does not hold the broken part, then reward each one, and when it is tightened, put on the restraint.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the sick nail on its back, and it puts a small hole on the other side of the shoe when it sleeps, to lift the helper to the top.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If you align the fracture of the bone by aligning the shoulder, or if you tie the arm to the collarbone, and it does not dislocate due to accidents, then it will be fine in about 20 years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then continue the exercise, if you see that it is useful, and pull and release it as much as it needs to be restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it will be restored in 28 years, with no harm to anyone.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the injury to the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Only the shoulder breaks or becomes wide due to the bone, and it does not dislocate unless touched.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If the acetabulum resembles the shape of the fracture, and it is adjusted according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then pour powdered mill with a lot of meal, and light spreads, and put on double fold.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on a large and thin sheet, a bit larger than the shoulder, and if it is well fitted when the sheet is removed from the shoulder, if you use flax threads, then this sheet fits well.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then the strap is tightly tied with a large iron band, if the sheet does not move from its place, and watch the line each hour.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it is pulled apart, if it is held steady, and the head of the shoulder is forced out of its place, and the patient feels great pain on their chest;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the spine is restored in 20 days or 25;
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, if it does not happen, and you are sure, because it is only the bones that are made to feel lighter;
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes before, and there is no sign of inflammation, then it is done, and the bone, and we do what we have said in the fracture of the force of reducing the swelling of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The weight is never broken in a million years, but this happens rarely.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the knee.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken outside, if it is dislocated, and it feels great pain, and there is lack of blood, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is when the patient feels pain on their back, and the head of the shoulder is placed between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed, and the heads of the second ribs are assembled in your hands, and subtly put in place as much as the bone seems to fit;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then apply splints and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or another light substance, and wrap it around the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and tighten the tie as much as possible around the back, and pull gently, and reward each hour with a drink, and if it relaxes, then tighten.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it hurts to uncover, either due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or gangrene, if you haste, then uncover, and remove the splint, and attend to what has come from the ways of treatment.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the cauterization, and hold it firmly until it is secure.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaching of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Fractures of the ribs only occur after great force is applied to the back, and at the top of the shoulder blades, and they do not displace unless they are greasy.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And it feels well in examination as it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is if you place the breaching evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then place the plaster, and tighten with a needle, if you have the skill.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the shoulder blades, it feels very great pain and pressure, as if from tears, because the bone points to the cloth.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it aches all over, and often vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is very unhealthy, and the ancients have put much faith in it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is said that it can be administered meat that inflames the belly, by pinching the nipple with the girdle.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, that challenging does not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, if it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And say no one of those who put suction cups on the leg, to suck out the poison, and it seems right.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, it is not certain that the suction cup does not draw out the excess from the leg because of its weak position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them would cover the shoulder with oily powdered lint, and then put tents between the ribs to measure the liver's turn, then treat the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that points the girdle, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to break the costal cartilage of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put a suture instrument to hold the skin.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and therefore it is necessary to drill the bone, and draw lightly, and then cut the lips of the wound, if they are large, and cleanse them with emplausters as long as they are healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	If the abscess ruptures, if it comes with smooth oily cloths on the leg, and on the limb.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the limb while it is dislocating, and keep the cloths on the chest as needed, until it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Never comes a fracture of the bone of the arm, and rarely does it happen that it breaks.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	When there is no pain, and you see whether it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel any pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Dangerous are those that are mortally dislocated, and if they do not move and feel well when extracted and not stretched, dangerous are those who say the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put them in treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you hold the bones in place, and if the accidents are those that are in the hands, and on the back there is a jump and a sense of wanting to vomit;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when it is dislocated on its side, it suddenly ejects with will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When he is lying on his back and sees a shadow, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Sacrifices that are fatal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If he does not labor in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, if it is something lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that if he complains of pain in his abscess, if you place on it ointment made from rose oil or oil of mustard plant, as long as it is soothing;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then place on it a comforting plaster and wrap it in cloth, and tie it with a cord, and order the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is healthy;
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	If any bones break, then cover them with a cloth.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	If the bone is large, then sew the two sides of the wound together with strong stitches, and then apply ointment by anointing it with oil until it is healthy.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	If the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone," take your right hand pouch and put it in your left hand, then place the splint and clamp it on, if you are skilled at it.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then hold it tightly, and if it is broken further, then cut it off, and the bone, and treat the wound as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	When the bone of the ankle is broken, and if it happens, unless there was already some pre-existing injury at the top;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and becomes long and twisted, and turns inward at the joints, and there comes pain to the leg, and swelling, and the broken part becomes inflamed;
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand as far as the broken bone;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and examine those that are the break and the shape of the bone;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the break is only at the top, then set it as straight as possible, so that it is in its natural position;
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it declines to the bone, then I order the patient to lie on his stomach as long as the restoration of this fracture is not clear.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have placed it evenly, then place a rule of flax or leather, and tighten the string, if it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and use the leather as far as the cost is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if abscesses appear, and they come, if they are not pricked, as long as the abscess is not pricked, and place what we have already said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to restoration, and tighten as it is possible, if there is no other accident.
et c’est li maniere.	And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	1. The auxiliary is that which is between the upper and lower part of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the following two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	2. The other method is to use a thin, straight piece of bone, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	3. And then fasten the heads of the bones, and hold them in place, and put the surgeon on the seat:
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	4. Then the arm that is broken at the shoulder must be placed on the seat, as it goes to the narrow part, and has a piece of bone in the middle, then can hold any heavy thing or extend the muscles:
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the forceps evenly in your hands, as long as the forceps returns to its original position as intended.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is if one holds the patient down while they are in pain, and lays their hand on their collarbone, then commands the ministers to touch the parts where the bracelet is on their hands, and touches the others lightly all over the limb, and spreads each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then force the limb to move against the bracelet, and move the bracelet, and stretch each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the forceps is bent at the shoulder blade, then you must tighten one string on the back and the other on the front, away from the forceps.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the forceps is bent towards the elbow, then you must tighten one string lightly, in the direction of labor, as long as the forceps is even with the shoulder blade and the elbow.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then place the forceps as intended, as long as it is correct, and tighten it, hold your breath until no pain comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if the inflammation comes, if it is not strained too much within seven days, and it is put on with fine thread and olive oil, as long as the inflammation is calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then the strain, and the way of the strain if you put the splint on the wrist, then assemble the arm with the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And tie the bandage, and strain on the helper, and on the arm, if the arm is in its place, nothing should prevent it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	If you doubt that the bone does not move, then use these, and place the incision with a wider and stronger needle than the others, and let there be one space between each needle and two spaces between the parts; and each space should be as large as it passes through the incision three times.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then draw out the needles, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, making them stronger and not moving them.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the seat of the needles and the traction, as we have said, in the direction you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess, if it is left alone for nine days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at every third year's link, whether the itch does not inflame or it does not reach the limb because of its being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then it should be done after three or more years, and the patient lies on his back, and has his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And put the helper in a simple linen bandage, and observe every hour or half an hour, that the broken limb does not move, or is not loose in the joints.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and the meat is cut in this manner, so that the meat is first divided into small pieces.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when he wants to take it back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary that the helper and the leg should be returned in XL jors all the time.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and therefore it must be deslided and given baths and ointments for the leg to be cared for.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the structure is stiff and thick, it should be eased and delayed for 40 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile" ones, and some are smaller, and it is this that forms the pouch.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the others are large, and it is this that is opposite to the small one.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance, only the large bone breaks, or the small one, and by chance they come together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the child's teeth are broken, the restoration is light and the healing.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large ones are broken, if it is not a good healing, and more crooked than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small teeth that are broken, then it will be sufficient to extend lightly and put even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large tooth, then it must be tightened more strongly.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And extend it over the fingers, and raise the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the teeth must be lower than the others, and it should be crooked on itself, and the cusps in front of it higher than the others, so that the patient suffers no pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the ministers of his arm to the opposite side of his hand, or to the other side of the elbow, and some other ministers to the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he places the bone in its place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is in pieces, then he puts each piece in its place, and if there are no loose ends that point to the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, set the bone and the fracture.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the force of the wound, I have spoken to the single chapter.
si pren la cure.	If it is taken care of.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of restoration, post-operative scars appear, which are made from ointment made of rose oil and warm wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft, nor too sticky.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and it is gently covered until the post-operative scars are soothing.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then the bone is cut, and he puts the template of the powdered flour with a lot of urine, because it sets the stitches, and it should be the shoulder of the bracelet that is larger than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and he asks if it needs six stitches or arms in more positions.
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	So that the bracelet is either in one of the bones, or in two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And it is drawn more on the bracelet than elsewhere, and less by moving it away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And the clothes that are on the bracelet are wet and slippery, and are not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the child, whose parents are far away, be born with a large or small body, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some years.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	If any accidents come to the member, if itching comes to the member, and you must heat the member with hot water as long as the itching is calmed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member rest without being stretched.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the stretching, and if the limbs are softened and the bones are exposed, and it seems like something, if it is removed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the knots do not come to the member because it is too tight, because of which it is necessary that you loosen it immediately, and let it rest for a while until the knots are untied, and then stretch it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things happen to the patient within twenty years, it is not our fault.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or if you are in pain, then you can put your hands on your chest, and make sure your shoulders are level, and move slowly and gently, and sleep on your back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And this cauterization is restored in XXX years or XXXV years, and by chance in XX years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Be cautious that on the back of the hand, and in the wrist, there are few dislocations, and only slight pain comes from it, many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient is able to hold it steady, and holds it firmly in front of them.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then the patient places their hand on the extended bone, and extends the fingers of the broken bones, and places them evenly in the joints, as long as they are well connected.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And they apply the plaster and bandages, if necessary, and then place an elephant according to the quantity of the limb.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And it is wrapped in a single layer of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the side of the plantar arch, I make a spool of linen, and instruct the patient to stretch it over their broken plant.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then the strain of a long loose hair, and it is the weight of the hair as heavy as that of the hand, and it is stretched, if it can be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the hip, then if you can place a splint on it, and another in the foot, if the hand is straight and erect, then the leg will be completely fixed between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the cauterization comes to none of us on both sides, if it is closed, then it is tightened, if it can be;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and it is stretched with the hand, and if you see if it makes a right small thumb to raise the cauterization, and does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the cut is on both sides, if it is as in the index or one of the others, if it is tightened, and it is held with the healthy hand that follows;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	If you tie them all in one place, according to their value, or if you put them on a scale, as you would;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and positioning of the incised abscess, and cut off what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thumb is often broken in many places, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration if it is tied with the pieces of the fracture, and the other is loose.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their face, then extends each member of its link to their equal part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And it happens when the fracture is broken from the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the joint, then one or more of the ligaments will be torn in the direction of the point, and the others will be left alone.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And as it reaches the joint, then loosen the knot of the knee, and also extend the leg.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the bones of the bone equally in both hands, according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and the patient should not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if it has stopped bleeding, then let it rest for a while and return to your work and your care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in parts.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap it around the fracture, doubling it in II or III, and removing the excess, then bend the leg until the heel comes to the root of the nail, and tie the long end between the thighs and the leg, loosening the knee joint, and they should come together at the knee;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the leg and the thigh of the leg, then put the splint on, and put a bandage on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use the fifth leg between the thigh and the thigh of the cloth so that it fits evenly under the bandage, then begin to tie the knots three or four times on the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as more is added to the splint, the bandage loosens less.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take the second pair of ropes that you have tied between the thigh and the thigh, and tie three knots on the ones that are already there, then return to the end of the cord at the foot of the second pair, as long as you see the pulley.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if it does not move from its place, then let it go, and then it will not have any abscess or swelling or other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it comes, and it is addressed as it comes, just as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if it has pieces of bone that prick, then it can be set; and it can be done.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if it cannot be, then the shoulder must be cut, and drained.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment will be as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never has the elbow been broken in place when we put the splint on it, as in the shoulder and arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	The first sentence to translate is: "Toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And advises that the cheek is restored in L years, or less than less, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the right knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the right knee joint there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, whether it is only a sprain or a puncture, and it comes to all wounds and hurts, and it feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when you put the hair back in its place as soon as it has grown evenly on both sides, as long as it can be gathered together.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the cautery, and use a round stylus, if you are skilled at it, and pull on it as necessary, then reward all the adjustments we have mentioned for other fractures, such as wounds and other appearances.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you apply to each accident what is necessary, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "muscatel" and the other is called "fascicule.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	When the wrist is broken, as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, it is restored in the same way as the other arm. If both bones are broken together, then turn the leg of all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bones are broken, it feels great pain, and one sees that it is well.
et torne desoz.	and turn around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	After stretching it, put it in place, and straighten the limbs evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But it is necessary to make the fracture look good, and if there are more pieces, then the extension should be less severe and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And the alige according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, if you take two pieces of twisted hair that prick the leg on both sides and are long enough to reach from the knee to the ankle.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap the leg with II the bend and from the knee to the ankle, and tie it tightly, and at this time do not let the leg sway to the right or left, and it is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one maintains the length of the leg, and it is of hair, and it is tied on the leg to prevent movement, and this is done properly at the fracture or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and shake each leg to see if it has an abscess or another injury.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the treatment is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones of the shoulder
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the shoulder never break and must be very strong, and they only crack in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there are many broken bones, and you see the bones thrusting against each other, if you put them in the earth as much as possible, just like when you run, then place your foot on the ground, and then lift the bones as much as they can fit in their sockets;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then place the splint and stitch it on, and then make a small tableau at the bottom of the chest, then pull it to the foot, then wrap the cloth around the foot, and other things that you have skill in.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, for you will find that the bones are broken and dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	If there are any of the two breaks, if they are restored, if we have said so, you must do it with your hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place the other end of the stitch according to the length of the first, and make a larger pocket, then pull the thread that I have mentioned, and tighten it evenly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are more than two or three breaks, if you place one stitch according to the quantity of each, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and tighten the knot of the thread.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if you are hanging the end of the stitch below the belly of the knot, so that it does not burn.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	It is necessary that you do not overlook the other things I have said about other fractures, as soon as we have said them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And cut off every accident as it comes.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the small finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the female pelvis is broken, if it is made larger, it then leans towards the painful side, and should be held by the buttocks.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the gap in the nature of the cloth-making woman's leg with a thick piece as I have.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then bend the woman, and gently bend the back little by little, and then pull out the cloth-making woman's leg as much as it enters the nature, and return the bone with the thick piece.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when it sees blood, if the bone is loose, and when it bleeds, it is reset, and then it takes seven days or more to heal.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the fracture is reset, and if you see, take a bowl of milk, and tie it around the wound, and pour all the milk into the nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the bandage as much as the milk is absorbed from the wound.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The nature will then heal the fracture.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it should be filled with cotton, and left alone for seven days, as long as it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	When the bone of the arm is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	These fractures are not uncommon to those who study and use it, and they read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture means in more ways the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand the doubts.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the meantime, when it is broken, take an ox's gape and pull the verge.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with bandages and leave it for three days or until it is completely healed, and it will be healthy in a short time.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, whether it is the bone of the shoulder or the helper, or seeming, that they are now healthy, if those wounds that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is that it re-bleeds, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the fracture in the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not die.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the patient does not die, then leave the restoration for the next day, as long as the patient is calm and does not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause other accidents to happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is broken, it is located at the point discovered, so you should place it lightly in your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extensions are not apparent for you to make them even with your hands, if the rammer has this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the size is according to the quantity of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary to prick three or four times, according to how much he has experience in each case of fracturing.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be sure and have a good one, and it should not wobble on the compression of the member in your hand, and also in front, and large on the face forward, like this.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called a "paliscade", because it should have the heads of the ribs placed on the edge of the apparent bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And the bone heals once, as long as it regrows, and it is even in comparison to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	The second line of the text is translated as: "And if the fracture is subtle, and the bandages cannot well hold the bone, then it is necessary to cover the top of the bone with the bandage, as long as the bandages have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you do not manage to return the bone, as we have said, if it can cope with an instrument suitable for this, whether it is a forceps, an incisor, or a hook, to your advantage.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then use this which is more difficult in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is re-set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, seek medical attention immediately, as there may be a problem with their natural joint.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you make it as if it were in its place, then wrap it with black vin slip, and properly, that's how it should be.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything else on the wound but oil, so that it does not come to sweating and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer the ointment when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it completely, according to the size of the wound, and make sure you apply the ointment well so that the wound is not stretched with the break;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times it has caused the patient's pain, and have brought the physician or the patient to death or corrosion at least;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the scabs be more moist and softer than the others;
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is large or grievous, and you doubt that something has gone wrong, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if you do not manage to put on ointment immediately;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But envelops around, in the shoulder of the arm, hard bands, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound has healed completely, and if you have used antiseptic cream on it, and you have applied a salve to relieve pain, which is a safe and effective remedy, then proceed with the following steps.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is sore and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the member be aligned in some way so that the bow can be applied lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they persist, and it cannot be held steady but moves away from the bow, you must try to reduce the fracture with a splint, and all those pieces that cause pain must be covered with the bandage.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If an abscess comes to the knee, or any other form of infection, if you are able to treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and opens the member, just like the bone of the elbow or the helper's arm, and other similar bones of large members, if it is not treated, because many times death comes, but it is left as long as it bleeds.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance heals by him after 20 years or 30, then treat the wound, if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The first sentence to translate is "des brus qui viennent sortre la sodure". The translation is
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the fracture of the break, but when it is near the joint, and one should see the appearance of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And by chance, it cannot make the limbs its natural position.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	If you want to know if it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If you have applied friction medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and senna, and similar others, if you do not take any of these, or all together, and mix them with warm wine or with enough beer or with vinegar;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on the wound, and extract it well, and do not let it slip in your hands.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	And then let it slip, and continue another one, until the nodes are fully healed.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	If you strain a well-made piece of cloth.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	Because the property of the cloth is that it all the folds of the members.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the nodding is already converted into hardness as a piercing, and it is sore to the finger, then the crown of it, and makes the superfluity appear.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Or you shave it as soon as it is healed, and the care as soon as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The first sentence to translate is "dou membre qui est foibles après la garison". The translation is: "the
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it becomes less after the weak and subtle members, if it comes from various causes.
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	If one of the bones is because it was too tightly tied, and was not properly cut as it should be.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because it had too many knots, and could not come to the joint of the member.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or due to a large number of knotting.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or because of too many movements at once, he did not hold his breath well.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or because there was little blood in his chest, which is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And if the treatment is that you make the patient lie down and tighten the cloth around the chest until it no longer multiplies in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	And he is given water, and he then feels better and relieved.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then he places salt on the member, if it draws out the swelling, and the blisters often form at the great pain point, until the swelling reaches the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and he is reshaped to his natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The dislocated limb after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limbs are twisted after reshaping, and the bones are broken open, and the formed member is crooked, it does not follow its natural shape.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	If one does not believe the words of those who say that the limb must be broken in several places, and many others have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	And the first part of the treatment is blamed, and great harm comes to it, and by chance the patient dies.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the wounds and tortures are fresh, and they are not washed with hot water, or herbs that soften are cooked, like figs of vismalk, and roots, and honey-like substance, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and the second part of the treatment is a mollifying agent, if well made, and you take the vismalk fat, and cook it with linseed oil or sesamum oil, and apply it;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fat figs, and roast them with animal fat, and similar medicines that reduce the saliva;
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is there a stop to the node when it is continued and long with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb at all hours.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	When the tortuosity is aroused and made rigid, as with an incision, and it is needed for the bone, if it comes close to the bone, under the subtle and light cut.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put on bandages and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sensation to the arm.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if we are late, if it swells, and by chance if we put it back on the shoulder.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it does not matter how we move it on the arm when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Many times brought to vomit and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Indeed, when this happens, if I make the patient better, then let him leave, as long as he is calm.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then the hot and oily member was raised, then it was gently reset, and each limb was treated as the patient's own limb had been treated.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations by the pieces of bone.
des mandibules	by the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	There came when the mandibles were dislocated, and the dislocation of both was in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	either they are a small piece of their bones, and are made soft;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	either they are entirely dislocated and hang downwards, and cut the saliva from the mouth that cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and wrap around the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it can return to its original position through various adjustments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and accomplished, then you must reset it as soon as possible, and do not struggle.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a way that the minister marks the head of the patient, and pokes the eyes with a small part of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which causes the mouth to be closed by II parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And the other two hands are deformed to make them equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to smooth out his cheeks, mandibles, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	2. And the teeth are placed evenly, as they should be in his mouth.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the cheek is twisted, then it is the same as the two mandibles being assembled, which are oiled with hot and oil blisters, until they are lightly twisted.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	1. There is no need to force it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	6. And when they are returned in their place, and the patient's mouth feels relaxed, if you cover it with soft cloth made of oilcake and wax, then lightly bind it with threads;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	10. And let the patient sleep on his back, and the head between two pillows, if he does not move to the right or left, and does not strain himself, but eats light meat, as long as the pain is tolerable and does not affect the jaws;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then he cuts what he can see lightly, and does not strive to open the mouth with his finger and drink, as long as the mandible is well nourished and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reinserted at once in an hour, and are not converted to their original shape, then if fevers and customary colds come on, and by chance the abdomen becomes distended, and by chance vomiting of pure bile occurs.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then you will know that it is a mistake.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times died those who came, in nine years.
de la forcelle	of force.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be dislodged from the cost, due to the continuation of the effort and the pain, and it is never loosened at the end, and it is felt to be so.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the splint and the bandage, and tighten it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	The head of the shoulder that is towards the chest cannot be reset.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	However, if it does not move at all, and if you reset it on your shoulder, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then place the cauterant and the bandage on it, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest as soon as they are able.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And then you should return the head of the shoulder to its place when it is out of your shoulder.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	It is said that the shoulder is not dislocated unless it follows three methods.
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	The first method is that it dislocates at the part of the bone near the socket.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	The second sentence translates to: "and it is at the lower part of the foot.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	The third sentence translates to: "and by chance it was dislocated in the heel, and it happened little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	The fourth sentence translates to: "and did not dislocate the shoulder or the arm from the elbow.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	The fifth sentence translates to: "and more often it dislocated the knee towards the ankle, even those who have little strength, because in this jump it was most dangerous.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The sixth sentence translates to: "for those who had some strength, the jump was not high, and it returned low.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they strike or crush their shoulder, and stretch out the shoulder with an abscess, and take care to have it dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary that you try it, as long as you are sure.
et adonques encomence la cure.	And therefore, begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And when the dislocation occurs as it moves towards the axle, and you make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a fissure, and then pull the axle towards the head of the shoulder, as if it were some ones;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his side, and make no movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, because you can clearly see it at the axle;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	For this manner of dislocation is not difficult to correct when it is new, or if the child is healthy.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is to gently hold the hand of the sick child at the top, then pull your thumbs apart, and gently bend the joint at the top of the arm.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And he holds the hand gently, extends it upwards, then places it apart.
si venra hastanment.	If help comes.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands, then it is necessary that the child be bathed in warm water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And the ointment is made of soft and soothing ingredients, such as honey and fenugreek and honey in warm water, and it is applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then let the patient lay down on his back, and place a pillow under his head evenly, neither too hard nor too soft, then place the foot of his leg on the pillow, and gently lift the shoulder of the upper arm, and hold the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and some other assistants smooth the shoulder of the upper arm, if it does not move at all.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder is now back, and if you see that the dislocation is reset in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is that you are present with homes that are larger than the shoulders.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that there are two directions to the costeit, and bolt the shoulder under the pillow of the patient's arm, and gently lift the pillow above the shoulder, so that the shoulders hang in the arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And some other hands treat the patient's hand down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, and there is nothing heavy with it, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also done in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is also done by cutting a long thick thread, whose ends are tied like a pistil, and not too large or too thin:
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then it is placed on the patient's hand, but if it has been too long, and the hand is too long and thin:
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is extended from the other side of the hand, and the joint returns to its original position:
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not return to its original position for all these things that we have said, then this cure is not effective:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	The first line of the text can be translated as: "Take two strips of cloth from the left arm, four inches wide, which will fit around the ankle, according to this form:".
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	The second line of the text can be translated as: "Then wrap it around the ankle, making sure it is not too tight on the patient, then place it below the ankle".
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	The third line of the text can be translated as: "And extend the arm above the elbow, then wrap the aid around the elbow, and the other end of the arm, then tie it with a large buttonhole, and leave the chest hanging from the other side".
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint now reveals itself.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way that may be, if you happen to put the palm of your hand a linen thread as even as possible, then place a sprinkle of flour on the mill with incense and wool all over the shoulder and around, then tighten the thread on the palm again, and turn the lace on the sprinkle, and wrap your hand around the arm at its collar, and let the hands remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary to dress it as little as possible, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then dress again after 5 or 7 days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is tight and not softened, it will be cured.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is swollen due to moisture or another reason, and it has not subsided after three days, then it is necessary to apply a cauterization at the third position, as shown in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you follow all of this, and after 7 weeks, the joint does not hold, and you cannot raise your arm forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And you should suspect that the joint never returns to its place in the shoulder.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the knee, and the thighs, or the buttocks, if it is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and it is maintained by another application;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be cured as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes pain in the limb, and later in movement, if the patient uses cold water many times, as long as that pain is not relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dear dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	If the joint that is difficult to move is dislocated several times, and it is dislocated again;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and has become dislocated from all sides, and even front and back, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it is seen well and felt well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is dislocated according to each figure;
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the male member with the female, if you see it open wide.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is weak, and cannot grip the arm, nor touch the shoulder with anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary to reset it every time, even if the arrowhead comes out, because if the arrowhead comes out, it would be difficult to put it back in;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance, it cannot be returned to its original position, indeed when it is at the bottom.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	If it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and by chance it comes to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the reduction if it is, when it can be returned, you can extend your hand to your two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the arms are expanded, and the hands are stretched according to the cost, from the top to the bottom, and the joint is held at its nook or at the root of the palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two servants extend the arm, and hold it with two servants, so that it does not move during extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm in each part, then wrap a long and wide strip around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when you see the joint of the joint in your hand, if there is no oil to lubricate the joint, then break the joint formation, as it reforms.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is at the shoulder, if it is covered with dry powder with beef dripping, and the formation is made, and the arm is tied at the neck of the patient, and some jors are left, then it is removed.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	If the joint is closed in its place, and it is left alone, and it does not move.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	If you see that the joint is not tightening well, and it resumes the cauterization and the ligament, and it leaves for a while until it is firmly fixed.
puis le deslie.	Then it is left.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	If the patient feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it becomes still, if it is bathed and cleaned well, and pressed until it is calmed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you can put a fat sheep's wool around the joint, then leave it for one night and the bone, and let it enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	When it happens, he should clean the joint immediately, then put on the splint again, and then take a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then repeat this 2-3 times until it is healthy.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see, if he puts on wool that is damp and hot with butter, and stretches it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand.
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The shoulder joint dislocates, and the return is lighter than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	In short, it is advisable to return the dislocated shoulder to its place as soon as possible, if it is still dislocated, or if it has swelled or has had an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And if you place the maimed hand on a table and extend the fingers, and measure it, then put your palm on the appearance of the joint, and pull it as it regenerates.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Indeed, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well with him.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then place the maimed hand on the table with extension and measurement on the palm.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then he should place his hand on top of his arm on the table, and he should see if his hand fits into this appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then the strain of the emplasy apostemic causes the hand to stop, and it should be allowed to rest.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in the shoulder after some time, then the injured joint will become even more tight.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and does not believe that as long as the hands are inflamed, and cannot hold anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	you realize that the nerve is cut, or the artery:
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other engine but to hold by fire cauterization, and by chance there is nothing else:
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are at the elbow, if they are placed on the probe that we have mentioned, then it is tightened and left for a while, then it is loosened and left alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, if the hot poultice of wool is applied, and the area is friced as much as possible when it is dry.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never has been dislocated the thumb of the hand in any place, never at the back of the palm or in the belly:
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then comes the first sentence to translate. Here it is:
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and he lets it lie for two days, and then sets it evenly on the third day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and from the limb, as we have said, and from the movement of the day, and then it is relaid.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, as long as it is wide, and then do the same, if it dislocates in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do this also, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The dislocation of the shoulder joint is due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated, or if there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, it can cause death to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the sign is that he jumps and feels like he wants to hold it, and cannot hold it, and many times the members are softened, or the knees or the shoulder or the elbow.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the eye is still at IV parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which remains motionless in the rear is called "glibosity".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that you reward it if the glibosity has come from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or treatment, then total destruction will occur.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from choking or drilling or similar things, the ancient methods of treatments by great words, or it has no great profit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated according to my intention, and have formed straw men in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is neither health nor sickness.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that come directly in the second ribs, and can be cured only if the one who comes to the back is properly done, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient's shoulder is extended over his face in the first shoulder and has some strain on him, so he does not bend.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then the bandage is formed at the top of the head on the ground, and the other is made of another piece, and a line is passed through the loops of the patient's shoulder, and the other is tied, and the heels are tied, and the calves.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two surgeons stretch the joints, one at the head and the other at the toes, among the two thumbs.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, as we have said, and the patient places his hands on the spikes formed, as he looks up.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a third arm of the elbow, cut off the nail, and the patient should be on his side, and cut off the head of the nail sucker, then place the mileu of the nail on the spike.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place his hands on the other end of the table, and press well, as he looks up.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If you see, if I do it on the thumb that turns on the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And if you twist the tendons of the shoulder of a man's arm, and turn them to the other side, and between each tendon, there is one long piece of stone.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And in every tendon, if the thumb turns, and they are firmly attached to the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each tendon, if the thumb turns, and they turn with it, and there are two small tendons turning with the thumb, to turn the thumb.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the knot that is among the girths to the chief, and the other knot to the stirrups on the other side, and each of the ministers turns his saddle tree to all the knot, and the masters put the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is evened, if you apply a desiccant ointment with much urine, and then the stools, and then the pill of a tablet of III doses, which turns the limb grievous and the healthy part of the spindle, then the knot of a tie, as we have said, and use the subtle remedies of Nero, as long as it is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and no thing comes at the end of health, if it is necessary to administer lubricating and softening medicines with the stylus that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never has any medicine been administered, and never has the appearance come at the back of the spine of the patient's stooped bone, and ensure that this is a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that has opened, because we cannot have too much confidence:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance, death might come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Experienced that the joints of the shoulder and the elbow are only dislocations, and they do not come with other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the elbow is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	First, the muscles and tendons are stretched, and then in front and behind.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And more muscles are stretched, and it becomes dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocations is clear if, when the injured leg is joint with the healthy one, it is longer and more open, and the injured bone can double its girth at the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the one that is deformed due to strangulation of the wound, because the head of the bone comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the forge, if this accident is contrary to these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who comes to the front, if they are well according to his completion,
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	there is no need to multiply the genital sensation with pain, and if you see him doing so, before, and retain his urine, and it will be discharged, and when he goes, it passes through the anus.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who came to the rear, if he cannot expand his gentle, and double, and that leg is more tense than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is raised against the costal bones.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The symptoms of this kind of dislocation are that if you reward it with the dislocations, they are ancient, and they depend on its position, if there is no cure.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it only requires presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, it will be stretched and deformed, and the head will turn to the left and right.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	If by chance it returns, and there is no other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong support, and straighten the leg with both hands, or with the one you are lying on.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and some other supports extend your hand in this way that it covers your hands with its nails, then straighten the leg by pulling with a line below the knee.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And some others tie the head with a line.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And extend as far as possible, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and hold it down.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to provide care for his appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If the dislocation is at the shoulder, then it is necessary to bring the patient to the surgeon's care if the costal cartilage is still intact, then tie the ligament around the root of the clavicle, and the bone that is dislocated, then tie the ligament towards the angle and towards the force;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then tie several other ligaments in his arms, and wrap the largest bone of the dislocated shoulder, and extend it to form the deformed shape;
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	If he returns to his original position now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you do not hold the shoulder in this manner as we have said, then it may happen that you feel the two feet of the maimed person assembled under a strong arch over the two ankles and the two thighs, and that the maimed leg is extended twice as much as the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then let it hang suspended from the head of a post, and let it be supported by the two arms of length.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then instruct the attendant to bind the head of the cux, and have other attendants hang down with the maimed person, who bind the cux, because the joint returns now more securely.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	When the dislocation is at its worst, if the patient is in great pain, as we have said in the case of gout, and draws the limb away from the bad leg properly, and also the weight;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two bandages, one on the head and one on the other end, then thread the bandage between the limbs at the bad joint in the form of a bow;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and it should be padded with wet cloths to prevent the joint from freezing, then extend each medicament towards it, and he puts them evenly in his hand, the dislocation;
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it there, and press as we have said in the gilt-side, and guide the member on the safe side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is before, if it is necessary to extend the bad leg firmly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And put the patient's pain on top of the sore, then press with the other hand, and draw it towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the elbow, and it cannot be extended with the therapist's hand, and they stand on the ground, then it must be as if the patient's shoulder had been dislocated in the same way, as we have said about the two shoulders.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it should be held on the face, and the extension is made as we have said before, and it must press on the joint to the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be at its limit when the therapist extends the legs, and they will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then reset the dislocation, and put the splint on, and hold it with a bandage, so that the pain does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	Stay in bed for three or four days, then remove the splint and put it back on.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	If you see that they are equal, if you strain them, then leave them for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then remove the splint and start walking, as long as the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways.
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	It is known to be dislocated from the front, back, and side.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not move away.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their knee at the ankle, and if the heel does not touch the ground, it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration is that you make the patient lie on their side, and extend the leg if possible, and place your back on theirs, and place your hand on theirs.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take the patient's knee in your hands, and move between your two fingers, then bend the two bones that form the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and other assistants extend the leg, as long as the knee returns to its place in the body, and the signs are that it is well bent at the ankle lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and make the leg straight at the knee, and assemble the fingers together in three or four lines, then take it off.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not work too hard on the joints of the elbow, as long as the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the limb is not present, and extension is administered with great force, as we have said in the treatment of sprains, until it is healthy again.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, and it is bent and twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And signs if the ankle is swollen, and try before the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	If the limb is light, and it should be gently stretched with one's hands as soon as possible.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, if you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the limb with one hand, and with the other hand, pull the knee towards the chest.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the pet on your right hand twice, and then on your left hand, and pull it up gently.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice as we have said, by bending and pulling the pet.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, if the evacuation does not return, because it comes back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot be returned, then bend the hand on its side on the ground, and make sure the passage is firmly pressed against the ground between its fingers, and hold it loosely so that the hand does not slip.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the minister tints the cuxe, and some other ministers extend their hands or to the limb where it is located at the collar of the shirt.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then all ministers extend correctly, and the splints are placed either side by side between the joints of the patient to hold the joint in place when extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the patient places the dislocation in their hands correctly, and some other ministers mark the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation returns quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when she presses hard, if she applies plaster and bandages over it, and forms the wound, and ties the thigh to the leg, and wraps the nerves that are at the ankle, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then it is left for two or three days, and if it does not become smooth, it must be straightened.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then the bandage is changed every three days or four, and the patient should use the splint for fourteen days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it does not improve by the end of the treatment, it is a sign that it will continue to dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound becomes inflamed and comes, if it is necessary to calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	Of two things, one is that the
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	If both are dislocated, and they are able to be extended gently in the work, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in no way near the shoulder blade or collarbone, it is necessary to put the splint on the upper part of the shoulder or on the .ie. table, and place your hand on the open joints, then press firmly with your hand until it re-emerges.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	When it is equal and it does not open, if he puts his thumb on the point of the shoulder at the head of the humerus, then the dislocation forms and he leaves it alone for three days, then he removes it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and he makes him rest, as long as he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it long, and if you are piteous and merciful and slow, do not be harsh.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things reassuring aphorisms to calm the patient, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, now reset the member in its place, otherwise the dislocation will worsen.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in its place, apply reassuring things reassuring aphorisms to calm the patient, and treat the wound, if necessary, with desiccants.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if the dislocation is a fracture, and the bones are broken, then the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	You must not enter the path of despair, according to what I said, for this is good for you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of your arm and heart.
