O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is beyond the science of medicine, and has gathered its fulfillment in it, and has ended through its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my vision that I have fulfilled this with the treatment, which is from the work of hands, which is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is despised in every way, if it is perceived by the science and craft, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in books written by the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this has led to the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to think that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this cauterization according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the cauterizers and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is their craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no one can find a master of hands in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who enters into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of parts, and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and joints, and the number of limbs, and the brain and the number of eyes, and the movement and rest of the limbs, and the issue of the same.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iocras says that the non is not with the non, and with the will is little; and at the same time in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that who is not acquainted with the things that are said, if he does not err and does not confuse the men; therefore, I have often seen these who become entangled in this science and then abandon it and senselessness and experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a foolish man who covers his head with scrophules or the neck of a woman, and covers the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issues outside that the woman dies in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see if another matter that treats a piercing of an old man's ear, and the piercing was large; if it is carried out with it, along with a piece of the bladder, and he died in the third year.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been accused of the treatment, and see the position of the assistant and the size of the piercing, and if it was not cut well, he died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see if another matter that treated the leg of our king who had a broken bone, and with the splint it was on the wound; and the patients who were ignorant were forced to break the bone on the wound as soon as possible, and did not leave any pain in the wound, and left it finally; and he commanded that he should not be disturbed; and later, when the leg was all frozen and the bone and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and I hurried to come limb by limb; and when I loosened it if it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all paths of the corruption were already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member as long as the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another mirror that will fall and be enchanted, and then inflamed by the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is free from melancholic matter, only then does one dare to touch it with iron if it is not part of the limb that can heal what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, three-year-old children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: it is knowledge, whether or not it is dangerous in other arrangements; and I will show you in each chapter of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And for this reason, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: it is knowledge, whether or not it is dangerous in other arrangements; and I will show you in each chapter of this book where there is fear and danger. If you keep your children away from evil, they will not be able to speak ill of you. Take your weapons in hand, and use them lightly but firmly, and use the best way possible for the grace of God, so that you may come to salvation and be healthy; and let go of the unpleasant diseases of grief; and keep your weapons from doing harm, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Gall's admonishes from his warnings: "Do not take medicine for sick people, lest you be called murderers.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have heard this treated in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medicinal cauterization, and it is the first chapter of the book that deals with the head up to the feet; as well as the forms of strums, stitches, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, as well as ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered and the forms of strums.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered by the hands of the chief surgeons, and the forms of the stitches.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, let us remember our work, and it is necessary that I give the quality of the help and not every complexity.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the help and not every complexity is the longest word and subtle science and the secret remedy; and for this they speak more of the wounds, and agree with each other, and few words they have to say, because I doubt the longevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that burning helps universally with all complexions, provided they have matter. This is to know the complexion hot in matter, and the complexion dry in matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, no one prescribes it and says that burning is very helpful; the other says the opposite: that burning is only useful for diseases that come from chlorosis and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used for hot diseases caused by chlorosis or dryness; but those who say the opposite that burning is very helpful for hot diseases that come from the hearts of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the heart of the chest and its moisture at the complexion of hot fire, you touch the heart cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I accommodate to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, it does not interfere more than he who has experienced it and knows by long use of the cauterization chapter, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their occurrences and spasms; other complexions have no fear, yet in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they are designed to resemble and correspond to the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that cauterization with fire is the best of all remedies, and more beneficial than burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and only brings harm to the member that is burned, and does not harm other members.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by removing, and bring the diseases of grief to health; and by chance, the patient should use the fire for its high quality and the goodness of its substance, not because it causes harm, if it does not have excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my research through experiment and the length of service and the study I have given to the art, and it is true about things; and for this I excuse the length of the word, because I only want to reveal to you the secret that is inside or fire, and the quality of the work, as it treats the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstrating; and you should receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	2. And know, son, that the burns are made in accordance with what is appropriate for the size of the skin.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	3. And I say that cauterization is allowable in all sizes, because the wounds are not misplaced by the help of cauterization; and moreover, if the cauterization is for necessary pains and hurts that cannot wait for the size that greatest malice comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	1. And do not think otherwise, it is a thin hair, as the wise man does; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and he says thus; but it is not so if one takes care, because cauteries are only a medicine that dries the complexion, and drys the humors that cause pain, and is worthy of medicine for its courage, and for its virtue in its work and its ladyship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	2. And it is true that the disease never returns according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease, and they are assembled in him by the acquisition of flesh and the superfluities of things, unless cauteries are administered to him or he has little excess and moisture, like cauteries for pain, and the superfluities, and only a part of the pain returns; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	1. And many people do not understand that cauterization is a part of medicine, and this can be seen; but they only believe that cauterization is after medicine, but we understand it is false, and cauterization is part of medicine because when we administer remedies for any disease and they are ineffective, then we use cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	2. Therefore, it is well that cauterization is part of medicine, but not according to the attention of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	3. The ancients said that a gold cauterization instrument was as harmful as one made of iron, and they said this because of the quality of the gold and its high substance; and they said that gold cauterization did not cause any harm, but it is true that it does, and I have experienced this in some people; and gold cauterization is as good as iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	When you wield an instrument of gold, you do not know its true color until it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has cooled; and if it is heated too much, it melts; then it has enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use fire cauteries in our work, which we have found effective.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter of the sharp tools, because it is more easily found.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cauteries
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is effective against moisture and cold in the head, and it is done by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors that descend from the sharp tools to the ears, eyes, and numerous dreams and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, stroke, and apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that if the surgeon is purged by a solvent medicine modifying the third or fourth degree, according to what the virtues and the age and the accustomed use of the surgeon can endure; and then cut off the surgeon's own chief.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make it stand between your hands, and press them together; afterwards place the root of your palm tree on the root of his finger between his two fingers; and if you see your two means, if he bleeds from the cut, wash the cauterization which is called "olivare", of which the form is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first sentence to translate is: "And place the lesion with ink on it, and make descending and pulling your hand little by little until you see the bone; if you don't see it, continue the cauterization as long as you see the bone just like I told you; then take a piece of linen, and wet it with water, and put it on the lesion, and let it stay for three days; then put on a moist cloth on a bandage; and leave it until the burn is healed; then cure the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the old ones say that as the wound becomes more overgrown, it more purges itself; and therefore it helps to aid.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of them say that one must shave the cauterization so much that part of the bone is exposed, and then remove what is diseased bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the cauterization must be shaved so much that it is as wide as the vagina of a woman, and as deep as the fist of a man, because the humors flow out; and then it must be treated for a long time overgrown; afterward it must be cured and seared.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauterization do not seem to be the best in any way, despite any fear one may have; and I seem to think that I should leave them; for the head of the shoulder is often weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we have seen in other parts of the body; and even when the patient's strength is weak naturally, the first appearance of cauterization seems more salve and milder to me, and therefore I use it accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	1. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	1. When the entire head is in chronic pain and lasts for a long time, if it must use the drugs called "cochie" and pills, as well as purging of the head and oils and plasters; and when the cauterization is done as we have said before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	The patient's head wound is of great nature and should not be too deep; therefore, we cauterize with the fire cautery a small area as we have mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each corne of the eye, as we have previously described, and then cauterizing the area called "vessels"; and these are the ones where you put in a ventouse; and hold your hand so that you do not see too much of the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will explain further; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the eyes be more superficial than those of the chin, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	A burn cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	In one part of the head, sudden pain occurs, and it spreads throughout the disease, and the head is purged with medicines modified, and the other treatments I mentioned in the division of diseases were made, but none of them helped: therefore, I performed cauterization in two ways, that is, with hot and cold medicine.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If you apply a poultice of alum with hot medicine, and it draws out the puss and the wound closes within two hours, then make a temple over the painful part so that you can pour the alum poultice on it; when it is poured, let the person lie down and hold the wound for twelve hours; then remove the poultice and apply a plaster of egg yolk to the wound, leaving it on for two or three days; then dip your hand in cold water as long as it is possible.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment when it is healthy; and if you see that there are no such medicines as I have written or treated of in my book on medicines that cause vomiting.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron burn if it follows this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizing iron, and its form is as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a ring or it has an opening, and it appears to be small; and place it on the painful part, and hold your hand and lightly press the iron on one side, as much as half of the vessel's depth; and ease your hand that the artery does not burn, which is cooled, and causes abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After wetting the cotton with thread, and then placing the leg for three days; then he puts moistened cotton in a bag, and then dresses the leg with ointment as soon as it is healthy; and if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" at all points, and be careful not to cut the artery in this embolism that is not the smallest.
de emigraine	of embolism
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an embolism as we have said in divisions of diseases, and do not profit, and see that the cauterization does not profit the patient, therefore it is necessary that you hold the "cultellare" cauterizing iron white; and then draw a line of one half of a thumb's length on the leg, and with your hand once, and hold the artery so as not to cut the bone; and give the mandible that is quiet when it is cut, and the nerves only that are quiet and spasmus does not come to the patient, and give the cure of sanguineous gout when the artery is coated, or coated with great pain and immediately to the one who did not know it, and who is not studied and practiced; and leave the wound in its place; but I will tell you that the sanguineous gout does not cease when the artery is coated, and I will show you where it is described in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that the cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the other head as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization or the chapter of extraction of the artery with the cauterization that has two cuts; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and it is heard of medicines soluble and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not stop, therefore shave this cauterization which is called "points", and its form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, pull on both sides of the aching ear, or pull on the two ears where the pain is held in knots, and draw out a little piece from the root of the ear where you have marked the ear lobe; and do this for each ear; after which cure the ear so that it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is only those that move due to fleas, as we have said in divisions of the disease; and do not make cauterizations like those that come from scratching and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is silent of the fume of yellows and expulsions of chief and gargles, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you cauterize the helper with three burns: one at the root of the ear, and another in a groove of the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and put the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and make the cauterization in the chief of the ear so that it is on a point of the corne of the chief, and another in the temple as long as some points; and leave the cauterization as much as the half of what it hurts is there; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The appearance of the dislocation that we have shown before is similar, but it is more subtle and it should be a bit larger; after treating the limb as we have said, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy occurs and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient does not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two at the two corners of the chief, and one on the chief, and one on the lip that is called "gash" as we have said before, and cauterize on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of drugs and modify the brain; after that, the physician takes the patient's head in his hands and places the applicator of snipes written or treated with ointments on the occiput; and this is the way of cauterization: if I have done it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy enough, that's good; and if not, make three cauterizations on the forehead as you descend along the collarbone, with intervals of a few centimeters between each; and the cure is like the others, and if you see any assistance needed, and the physician is suffering, make the cauterization in the mileau; and if the art is, two more on the two corners, and the cure as long as it is healthy; and the cauterization called "olivare" as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and what we have already said; then put the cold patient under the care of the physician, then make a fire cautery on the head, touching each corner, and the ear and the third the spine of the neck; and if you have more experience, the body is moist and the patient is feverish, and the disease is far advanced, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the neck; let it remain as long as the least pain is felt, and gently hold your hand; after the cure as soon as it is healthy, and as the cauterization that we have called "olivare" is already mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	The first sentence to translate is "de l’epilempsie". The
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should only be treated with fire cauterization, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffering from severe pain due to poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot endure, I make them gargle and mastication modifying the brain often with bones; after they have recovered, I do the cauterization according to what we have said before, on the vein and on each corne; and if the patient is weak and suffering, I do the cauterization as I have said to those who have paralysis and mollification of the corps, on the spine of the back and collar, and it is the olive oil according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is not already in labor, make a fire cautery with this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is the excess or corrupted and swollen moistors, therefore the cautery should be made with parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the declining excess of melancholy, and the corpulence of the patient's moist moisture, then he should drink something because the brain may be unclean, according to what is in front in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the patient has rested; after make a well-made linen cradle, as well as you can circle it, if you put in the head of the patient; and the patient if he is crooked, and should be held by all parts; after presenting the liniment, and let it be wet with old butter; and heat the patient to a proper temperature, so that he can bear it; after letting the circle drip from the head, and let it cool down; and do this once a week for a healthy patient.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see this, it is because you are being burned while making more pricks with the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing dries out the eye significantly; then it is placed on cotton wool and covered with grease of linen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hair comes first as signs I have said in the division, then it begins and therefore drink and thus cleanse the head, and wash all moisture, and I did so several times before eating.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to comb his head, I cauterized his head, and I cauterized on the two temples where the hair ends, or if it ends elsewhere, I did so on both; and I covered all the veins and arteries that are exposed because of the hair, and make the cauterization long according to the size of the temple; and wash with cold water, and if you see too much blood coming out, if it is due to part of the hair being cut off, as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to make the cut as you have seen; and no time is it ever made that harms the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and flow into the veins, or over the arteries that appear as the appearance of the white of the eye; and one sees that it is an excess of cold watery humors, therefore I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the chapter: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize on both sides of the bones; and if it is necessary, then the cauterization is felt along the entire cut.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A large amount of tears comes from the densities of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore you should drink mild wine; after that, you cut the head, and make a fire cautery or olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries of olive oil that are called "clavilis" on the two wounds, a little dried on the cheeks; and your warder is the artery that you do not cut.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, therefore the cauterization of this cautery called "olive" is done.
de coi ci est li forme:	1. If the patient's head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture,
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	2. And if you see that the fire cautery is made on the two ends of the hairs, and they are not moved until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	A long hair that does not stand up
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is no time when the hair of the oils is converted into pardons, and they prick the oils, and it is done according to two ways: that is, by fire or by an ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in bed; afterwards, take a piece of paper and draw a figure that is as large as the wound, and mark the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put cotton on the hair, moistened with oil and musk, on the oils, and then examine the cauterization of the kind that was made:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the part that you have burned a few times, make sure the eyes are clean; and the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised at the point of the needle; then gently press your hand, and leave it for three days, then put cotton wool in the buret as long as the burn is ostee; after the cure of ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is soft, then resume the cauterization on the same part as you have done before; and if the hairs are long, if the cauterization is done when the paper is raised to its natural point, and is even, and does not prick the hair at the point of the needle.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The first line of the text translates to: "The fire cautery is that which you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have long hairs, if the medicine is your duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the stitching is done, if you raise the leg, and see if the paper is raised as well as if it was raised by confinement of fire or by incision; and if it is, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then add more medicine on top of the leg or if the medicine has not been used, as long as your fingers are even, and your nails are in place; then put on cotton wool in a bandage as much as the wound is swollen, after which cure the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is your task to shave yourself well in your groin area with great care, so that you do not cut yourself with the blade.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in it, then resume the medicine on the part that has become softened by the proper paper, as you have done before; after the cure as soon as it is healthy; and this is the form of the candle wick:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the hair of men is different in size and thickness, according to your own measures; and do not follow the right way of this study.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The treatment of fistulas by burning
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in dividing diseases, and your treatments do not help, therefore it is necessary that you burn it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and trim the hair around his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or fall out; then apply cotton wool moistened with oil or persillon juice to the scalp; then heat the cauterization instrument which has been divided: and if it forms like a pen point, assemble the cauterization so that the point is in the middle of the hair; if you see, if one end is pointed and the other not, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but all this, what is important is for your own use.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it becomes overstretched, and the exudate is drained; if it closes, it causes the bowel to move; after forming the cauterization piece, hold your hand on the cauterization piece at the part where the oil is exposed, so that your hands do not become crazy; and put the cauterization piece in the oil grease, and it corrodes.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then continue the cauterization again once more, and if you have experience with it, and leave it for three days; after that, put cotton wool on the dressing, and apply the desiccant ointment as much as it is dry, and when 40 hours have passed and it is dry, if you put an acidic corrosive medicine on it so that the bone is exposed, then follow what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understands the fistula, and then puts in the furnace the subtlest candle of which is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make it to the quantity of one .З. of plunk; and hold your hand firmly, and do not move the patient's arm at all, until the plunks melt and flow to their oil; and it is necessary to put on the oiled cotton cloth in the abin of uefz or in awe: the plunk if it is well for the fistula, and the healthy for the health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the child, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is best for the child's own health.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips that are called "cracks," and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in divisions, and the cure does not work, then use a small fire cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient in those cracks as much as possible; afterwards, heal the limb by making it healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes from the gallbladder or uterus, or fallopian tube, or teeth, and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistule; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit much: therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize according to the size of the fistule; after the bolt or rupture of the fistule, and hold your hand until the fire reaches the font of the limb, and if it goes in; and make once or twice, after the treatment we have said in the treatments, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured once or twice, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the limb and open the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine and it does not work, then put a poultice of malarial ointment on your gum; afterward, wash the cauterization that formed afterwards in this way, as if you were putting a collar around the root of the tooth; then tighten your hand and continue the cauterization according to your will; after filling the mouth with bitter-tasting ointment, paint it once an hour and rinse it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	1. And in part, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums become soft and restrained, and the moisture becomes dry.
de la dolor des dens	2. of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	3. When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, or it is cold, and the remedies of medicine do not help, then it has a duty to cauterize in two ways: and cauterization by burning and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	4. If cauterization by burning is such that you use sheep fat and put it in a copper or iron spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and make the painful tooth hot, and hold it until it cools down; and often I do this until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are burning in the fire, and put the painful tooth on the iron, and make it hot until the fat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. If the fire cautery is large enough to burn a piece of iron or lead, and it is quite big that the smoke does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, and form it according to this, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often as the pain will be less for you or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	2. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with hot water in the pressure of this cautery, and then it will cool down; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	I make a cut according to what you want, and according to the size you have; this is the shape of the knife:
des scrophules	of scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are fleshy and cold, and do not respond to digestion with medicines, then wash the knife's edge with water after it comes out of forming, and make two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and put the knife's edge on the abscess once, or as it may be, until it reaches the font of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then put the knife according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and wrap the wound with soft cloth as the wound oozes; after curing the wound with ointments and plasters as it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the collar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistors win against the hard bones, and at the same time when the cold complexion comes, it is then necessary that the patient be treated first with soluble medicines; after that, I perform the fire cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, I perform another cautery at the joint of the dole col at the head of the spine, and it is called "clavile" as we have before; and cure the limb as we have said until it is healthy.
de la toust	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou c
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the face are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chill, and it is an old disease, then make cauterizations at the places you wish; and the other cauterization is between the two eyes; and that cauterization called "clavicle" is according to the form mentioned earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterizations by pricking all the cauterizations called "points" in the form mentioned earlier for the disease of the ears; and let the points be as close as possible, or farther.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the wound according to what has been said, and if it is a burn, then apply cauterization with three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are lighter, because you make three in one.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After if you have shaved the beard on his back and on his chest; after softening the skin that was tightened by the titillation as it was with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, then cauterize the area with two ners douqueil like this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	1. And cauterize the loaf as much as it pierces the costal side, and it would come from the future sharp cauterization of four cauterizations; and this is done with the cauterization tool that has three needles, because the appearance of cauterization is six cauterizations; and the needles are according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the future sharp cauterization that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	2. And no time is ever adjusted on this one nerve because it has eight cauterizations:
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	3. After place the cauterization tool on the wound with silk; after let the patient rest, and do not pull on the limbs as much as they are well relaxed:
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	If it is dislocated, something comes out quickly, so a cauterization is made on the large cauterization clavicle, or rather, a cauterization is made by pinching.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is dried by the moisture and is healthy for the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold sweats and moisture come to the stomach as it is drawn towards its complexion, and the purges are multiplied to him, and the customary cures are applied, and he does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be sewn on his back, and his legs and hands extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. For this reason, I made three burns on the leg of the horse for the quantity of a doe, at all the cauterization points, and two burns to soften the two costals so that the cauterizations are at three angles, and there should be space between them as they will separate when they start to sweat; and they should be cauterizations so that they turn purple in the two parts of the neck, and the figure of the cauterizations should be according to this form without any deviation.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	2. And if you see a large burn on the stomach according to this form; and the one who suffers from this burn, should cauterize by touching and holding the stomach at the point where you saw the quantity; then the cauterization should be on all the points called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	After the liver suffers from pain and moisture, as long as it is healthy due to its natural complexion; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and if it does not benefit him, then the patient should be burned with cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, defending the gallbladder, whether the bile from the liver comes; and there should be space between each cauterization of a groove in the liver; and they should be long enough to cover the entire cautery; and it should only be one half of the knee, and it should press with the hand on both sides of the cauterization; and if it cannot, then it should be gently extended and lifted, and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, if you burn these sharp cauteries, be subtle and gentle in the art, and be careful not to burn all of the skin, for you will dry out the entire body; and that it does not become soggy, because the hair is very delicate in one place and the skin is sensitive to touch.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	If it has entered the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or on the skin: if it is in the liver, it feels great pain but not too much; and if it is on the skin, it feels sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure is done, if the hair is shaved on the head; and then stretch the limb or the affected part, and then heat the cauterization that is similar to the wound, according to what form it is.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	1. And cauterize as much as the hair is long, and it grows back slowly, until the poultice is all used up; after the cure according to the cure of wounds as soon as it is healthy; and only this cauterization uses no other hands but those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	2. And can it be overcome with great effort, and it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	3. Of cold cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	4. The ancients said that one must make cold cauterization using roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of Aristolochia as long as you can find it, and it should be dry, and it should be large and long as your two; and the oil, and you heat it, and cauterize as much as possible between the force and the col, and make two punctures on descending in the part that is rough like the beard; and make two punctures between the fifth costal and the sixth, descending from the neck; and make a puncture in the pis, and the other in the stomach, and in the spines, and let the cautery between the spines deflower; and do not press too hard with your hand, as you would smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient one has ever said that no man uses a fire cautery like the scalpel, and they thrust it between the ribs, as soon as it reaches the abscess; and then there is the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	However, in this case, there is pain or the patient has already died, or an abscess has formed that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse that we have described, and it does not benefit, therefore there are three ways to cauterize that you know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are doing three or four cauterizations, do them according to the length of the hairs, following the figure of the cauterization we have described before; and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient's arm be near his back; and another way of cauterization is if you scrape the cauterization that has two needles, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and ease the knee which is where the hairs are, or the pain from the wound comes from the side, and make the elevations of the knee according to the knee, according to the length of the chest, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the chest.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After burning the two nerves until the pain is felt from the other side, then take the cauterization tool, and then insert it into the fire cautery at three points. If you see, cauterize all the way to the cauterization tool at four points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten wet with long tents, and this is enough that the other cures before say.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, for it is done in the way called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four caustizations entor the bowels, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the gallbladder, and two on the back near the spine, and one at the anus; and make sure the cauterization is close to the spine of the knee.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cauterization, let the patient have loose, long hair, and do not delay the treatment of the physician after the cauterization; healing will come quickly, and the two interpretations will be assembled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization is made on the belly with the clavicle that we show before; and on the back it is olive-colored, according to what is shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the enflaming of the wounds
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the wounds are enflamed by hydration, and are plain green, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the wound between the auricle and the anus; and gently place your hand with the cauterization so as not to return.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far into the flesh, otherwise it will cause more harm than good. The cauterization should be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterward, make two cauterizations on each leg at the pointed end of the thigh; and make one cut through the flesh in front and the other towards the back, passing through the leg; and leave the cauterizations exposed to cure for as long as necessary, according to the patient's condition; after which, apply the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the mustard
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtuous and digestive substances that are in the stomach and intestine are swollen and cannot be cured by usual methods; and you see the patient very suffering and of great vertut, if make I grand cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or on the small intestine, at the cauterization circle; and IV cauterizations are made subtle at all the small cauterizations clavile, and II cauterizations on the hams.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see many moistures and the patient suffers, then perform a fire cautery on the point, and a cautery on each side, and two cauteries on the stomach of the large intestine because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	If the hemorrhoids are fund or one or more, and they are old and large, full of cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, which is all deflated and deflated in triangulating, and a cauterization on the bowel II doses; and if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face on the large cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cauterizations; and leave the cauterization over long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the limb as much as possible.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chondrosarcoma which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you remove the carbuncle, if the cauterizing instrument seems too hot, and then place it all over the carbuncle; and leave as much of your hand as the cauterant reaches to the vein's birth, without cutting; do this once or twice, and if it has pain from the carbuncle, cauterize each time as we have said; after the cure of wounds as much as possible; and if you cauterize with a large cauterizing instrument, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound that was not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear tightening or opening, we will tell you in his own words if there is any illness that cannot be healed by burning.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and produces watery and corrupted excrement, if you provide it with enough food, and make sure to keep the whole tent intact, as much as possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the burning is done, and the wound is rased, and the boute is pulled out according to the amount of food that entered, and the cautery is resumed as soon as the corss and corrupted parts are clean and healed, once or twice, depending on the amount of blood loss; and the patient is given an injection of le nerf which is available, and large doses.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	1. If the fistula is in the course of the ureter and intestine, and it is not removed, and one does not perform this surgery, and thinks that it is not a serious matter; after healing the wound until it is healthy, if the fistula is still there, and the materials are long tens, then it is certain that the wound is completely healed; and if the materials are not long, then it is certain that the wound is not completely healed, and the bone at the site is corrupted. And so, one of these that we will say in his wound.
de la maladie des reins	2. of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the head comes on suddenly, and with large ventosity, and no woman is at hand, then it is necessary that you cauterize it on both sides of the head with the cautery we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in a single line, and they become more helpful.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak from the head and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then cauterize in the part of the bladder where the urethra enters, either on the left or right side, and make each cauterization as long as one of your thumbs; and also cauterize the back of the bladder, or two if you wish; and make the cauterizations according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the marriages
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wife is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flow is corrupted and comes late; and when they come, it causes great pain: therefore, it is necessary to apply three cauteries along the thigh, as we have said or cauterization of the bladder, and second cauterization of the back; and if it is a clamp, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the thigh, and for this reason if it does not move from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the knees are in a different department than desired, then it comes that you cauterize the patient's shoulder above the thigh at the cauterization like a circle, and point before the knee on the thigh as it turns, if the thigh is in the circle; and if it is a cauterization like those we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three olive-sized cauterizations and they should be as large as all the hairs; and the cure will be fine once it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the shoulder
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the shoulder joint, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: therefore, you must purge the patient of large humors of fetid pills or other bones-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: it means to assemble burning medicines and cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	The fire cautery is done according to these methods, and some are like this: you cauterize at the end of the hair where there are three triangular cautery marks according to this form, and make a deep and large hole between each cauterization point of a hair, and it should be olive oil; never cauterize on the edge of the hair, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, that the cauterization is done at the circle we have mentioned in the dislocation of the hair; but do it in a way that the circles contain the entire hair, and all its points are equal.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And when the pain reaches the thigh and the knee, one should cauterize there either the ankle or the malleolus, on the side where there is less flesh; and whether it is cutaneous or subcutaneous, and whether the patient feels that the pain extends to two points or close to it, one should cauterize at the point where they feel the pain three or four times, which is called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain persists, make it a cauterization; and if the pain is in the groin towards the thigh, make it a fire cautery or circular one, and take good care of all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen others who have cauterized on the ankle, and they burned so much that the entire leg became inflamed, and the foot as well, and it was noticed and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the stomach where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	If the pain is in two parts assembled, make a fire cautery on both sides according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the fire cautery of the shoulder, if it is like this, make the iron as follows: make one piece and so it is big like some giant's nail or a smaller one, and it should be interwoven and it should be between interweaves and it should be spaced out like a piece of wire; and they should be interwoven in two parts and they should also be like noses, and it should have a good handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And let it be washed as many times as it is all red and glistening, and then put on the handle of the malady's cauterizing tool, and make it curve once around the cauterized area; and leave it for three days; and then apply ointment, and leave the wound open for long tens; after the cure of the ointment, as it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	1. Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery due to its fear of the pain of the patient, and if we see little use; and all this is burns, which can be endured, and it or it does not hurt.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The first line of the text translates to: "If you have a fire cautery and an instrument for interlocking in your hand descends the edge of the door, and is either of iron or of brass with a long handle, and in the upper part it has II of us, and between each of them the quantity of a doe; and they are overturned and separated, and join together according to this form:".
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you place the handle of the axe in the patient's hand gripping it firmly, and press your hand down on the handle; after heating the two circles of the hot awl that has been heated in the fire, and leaves it for an hour, and suffers the patient's pain and the shock of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the fire cautery, it is similar to burning; and when the burning has been done, one should hold the hand with the instrument and gently raise the hair of the affected area, and leave it for three days, and apply as much ointment as there is blackness in the bandage; and then leave it for three days that it may become straight; and this will help after the cure of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that burns according to what you have done in the hair; and this is the way of the hot stick, and I have written or described the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	1. Take alkaline and live ashes, as much of one as the other, and mix them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	1. If there is a small hole in the bone that is not pointed with a razor and can be entered; then put another pot well filled, and add alum and chalk and sugar until you have two of the powders you want to have in your hand; then leave it until the water drips out of the ague and chicory or can be poured, then take all of this, and mix it with salt and alum as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	When the fire is applied and it is maintained in the wounds of medical knowledge and other cauterizations, it causes a work that resembles fire, and if other medicines are used that are well cauterized, such as honey and anacardium and chalz with soap, all these things melt together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galiens tells us of a remedy by which some were cured of the pain in the shoulder and sciatica, and he says that no other remedy is needed, and that it was cured in one session every time this remedy was applied, and he was bathed as he instructed afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And then in another way, you should make the patient lie down on a hard and dry bed, and rub the wound with a little grease, and put it on the shoulder, the thigh, and the leg where the pain is, and tie it; and leave it for three hours and according to the quantity that the patient does not feel the pressure anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then I let it enter the bath as much as the chest is raised, and then I let it enter the bed, and the pain will leave all and be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And advises that no one should use such cauterizing medicines after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	When Diascorides says that if the scientific vein is cauterized with the fleece of a goat, it helps; and it must be done in a certain way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the fat and make it into oil, and put it in the flask that is between the little finger and the other which is called the fosphile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After drying the goat hair, and burning it until it is charred, and then putting it on the wool, and leaving it as long as it remains stained; and do this again and again until you think that it will reach the skin, and that the pain will cease; and this way of cauterization is called "cauterization with goat hair".
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain of the back door
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by squeezing or drumming or too much evacuation, or from the appearance of cold expanded matter, in none of these appearances is cauterization justified, rather it should be used for those coming from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been freed from bitter pills or other appearances, that you cut on his back, wherever the pain remains, three lines of "enche," and in each line V cauterization or more according to skill and the amount that the patient can bear; and make the cauterization according to the cauterizing instrument called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IIII on the clavicle knife according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to children, and the signs of the beginning are that they become narrow-eyed when they sneeze, and cry; and you see the spine of their back and the appearance that comes from the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and it is cured, if the cauterization is done on the burner according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization makes every part of the spine even.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the end of the spine by pricking two or three lines, and they are points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the limb until it is healthy according to what we have said, and you should not perform a fire cautery on the skin that is in the flesh of the neck.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints comes from moisture that is expanded to every member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: make a cut through the joint of the foot, and the cauterization should be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it seems that you are pricking at the face with sharp nails, then perform a burn with the entire burn as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pain comes to the thigh and other joints, and this happens many times, then perform a burn on each thigh III or IV of each part, at the entire olive cauterization; and if you have skill for more, but do not hold your hand too long as much as the pain may be.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	If the pain descends to the thigh and to the back, then apply the burn we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	1. If the pain is in the hands, then I make points every second line; and if there is no more pain, then I make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes from the wrists or elbows, then cauterize each part, and govern the patient's behavior with medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	1. If you make the patient govern their behavior and purge impurities, then they will be healed by God.
de la routure dou syfac	1. of the rupture of the facial skin
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	1. If the rupture comes in wrinkles, and the blisters descend as coins and it is novel, then it is necessary that when you see it curing, it does not mix with the other; and that it uses things that soften the belly, if it comes down from his belly; after which you place it on his back between your hands, and command that he licks his hair as much as it is repaired, and pulls it to your two, and signs that it closes the rupture on the bone of the other hand, and in all a sign that is like half of a circle around the other corners; then wash the cauterization with the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and feels cold.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then shape the dough with your hands; and guide your hand so that they do not return; and work well on the thighs, and put the cautery at the sign of all your hand, and hold it right and as far as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue again until you touch the bone; and be careful that the dough does not seep while you are making the cautery, that you do not burn it; and so that the malady does not kill or another harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the measure of the bone, and also great for adults; after three days, cure the wound of the thorn as much as possible, as long as the burning is not too deep; after other injuries as soon as they are healed, and gently lie on his back as long as the wound is well soaked; and it is necessary that his clothes be loose for a long time, so that the dirt does not come out when he gets up to relieve himself in the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-made girdle around him, and after forty more days; let him rest, so that he works quickly and drinks too much beer and honey, and braids his hair too much; and when he performs this instruction, he is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the surgery in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, one should re-cauterize according to the quantity, and it should be the third angle according to this form; after the treatment according to what we have said; and no ancient has said that one must cauterize at the cautery with three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	1. However, the first sign of the joint is the elbow and I make a line for the widest part of the fracture, and another one, and hold your hand with both hands for all the cauterization clamps.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	2. However, the first cauterizations are more gentle and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	3. with no pain in any limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	4. When pain comes in any limb, whether from cold or wounding, and this pain lasts for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the cauterization point called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the affected limb and its thickness, its flexibility, its location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is healthy after the first burn, that's good; if not, restart the burn at another spot, because it is customary to die in the member that is proximate, since it must be burned as many times as the maudlin allows.
de meselerie	of masculinity
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The man is aided by the burn once and the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the burning, when the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and does not end or tire, and you doubt that corruption will spoil all the maudlin, therefore I make the following burns on the head: I cut off the head, and the other at the front of the neck at the end of the cheeks; and I touch the corners, and the buttocks at the heel; and it should last as long as the bone, and as long as the sweat comes out so that the vapors of the large humors can come out; and the burn is made on the nose according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	1. If the scald is scattered everywhere; it is obviously present, if you cauterize the wound with these cauteries that we have mentioned or chief, and the cauterization is in one place, and the cauterizations on the shoulder point, and on the back of the neck, and on the crupier and the other delicate parts, and the wrists, and the tendons of the ankles, and all the joints of the hands and feet, and the fissures of the hands; and you will find nerves that are located below the skin, which you should not burn, and never made a cauterization on the bone of the elbow, and the other on the stomach bone, and the other on the liver bone.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When you perform more cauterizations, the patient benefits more and does not feel pain in the cauterization as much as they should because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the leg with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the leg is infected in any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then perform cauterizations on the member according to its size and thickness; and let the cauterization be made in the part of least pain; then treat with ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	1. And no time is made when cauterized on the hand, foot, and back, at the end of the nerve that is quieted by the member, and if it is not enflamed; and nothing enters unless one knows the members and the movements of the nerves in the body.
de albaras	2. Of barbers.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. When the disease called "albars" is awakened, and the art of medicine finds nothing to cure it, then cauterize with a cutter one part per quantity of essence of oak, as long as the blenchour is enflamed, and is quiet; then use flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and senna and senna of alendron, of each a part; and mix all together, and apply it to the member as often as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if it is cauterized with the cautery that seems to form a circle, all around the circumference of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the wise say that cauterization is also made in the environment of the sore; and it seems to me that this is not very good, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted it to happen once; and the most correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circling", as we have said in our mouth about cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The phrase "de l'enfleure qui ne puet meurer" translates to "the enflamement that cannot be
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which delays its death either due to excessive expenditure or insufficient painkillers, or because of old age, and you see it suffering: then the cauterization is performed by touching small cauterizing points; afterwards, it is left alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the cauterized part healing, if the cauterization is well made, then.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	When treating the disease known as "adubelati," place your hand in the environment of the affected area while cauterizing, and ensure that the patient feels relieved in some way, as if the course of the sweat is becoming less intense.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, when it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease called "corrodens," which is actually a kind of swelling in the members, as it causes the members to become as dry as the hair.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the member that can suffer from being cauterized by fire, then sharpen the cauterizing iron according to where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until all corruption is removed, and nothing remains of it, as everything that is corrupted becomes stone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it remain for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil as much as the burned eschar is large, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If after three days no healthy char is born, it is good; and if not, continue the cauterization on the parts that are still corrupting.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has never been cured by medical treatment in the place of fire cauterization; but all cauterization by fire is more helpful, and I have already said that the cure of the medical remedy is in the division: take the amount you have.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of wounds that come from pieces
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that wounds come from pieces that cause a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that must be avoided.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know that cauterization is by fire, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cauterization by fire is when you heat it and cauterize with hot water, as if it were a pin of wheat, and it is made of iron in the size that can burn all parts, and have subtle margins; after you put it all on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail; and it leaves for three days until it starts to exude pus; then I make a poultice of well-cooked, raw eggs with salt, and leave the poultice all night, and the nails will be pulled out of their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment, applying it as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the wound becomes infected many times, and in the hands and fingers, then it is necessary that you have a cauterization of hot fire; and it should be done in this way: take a piece of iron or steel, or a thorn from a bush, and tie it to the nail and the hinge, so as not to have warts; then place the iron on it so that it burns everything around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand when turning so that the margin of the iron touches the root of the nail, and you will find the hot fire way smoothly at the root; then suffer the pain of the hot fire for a little while, then let it go, and it will fall off all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I will create a subsequent after this, as long as you are aware of all these things that are in the course, then I will cure the wounds that enter char.
li cure dou trembler	I will cure those who tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If any tremble from cold, or fever, or other, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries or four on the back, one cauterization between each spike; and one cauterization or a point, and at the stomach with the olive cauterization; if they continue to tremble, and recover from the disease of the cold.
des pustules puans	of pimples painful.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	There is no occasion for the appearance of blisters or pustules, which come from large, corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to do a fire cautery as soon as the blisters or pustules appear, use a subtle cautery of mithridate wood, or if the point is seized by fire, or the root of Aristolochia, or in a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never do cauterization at the beginning when they appear in this way, as it will not cause them to grow forward, but it is disrupted by the superfluity that comes, and they are cured; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the arrow is captured
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great sanguinations of blood from the arrow that is stuck in the wound that comes to the pardefuers, or to the incision of the abscess, or to the fire cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to enchant.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And if there is none, then whenever you have to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it as tightly as possible until your finger is calmed by your thumb, and no more pain; then put the olive-oil cautery on several small and large ones until they are all red; then I, or according to the size of the wound and the leg you hold, hold the cautery against the vein or where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery as long as the vein is not restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If it hurts when you pull on your child's vein, and the cauterization ends, then quickly take another one that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after another until the wound is fully healed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is sensitive, and avoid other harm to the patient; and you should know that as soon as the artery is without cutting, it cannot well reddish immediately when the artery is large, if it is not by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization or extraction if it is properly treated, or by tightening with thread, or by medicines placed on it that can cause redness and swelling; and it should be tied and extracted as soon as possible.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will tightly mend the wound with threads or to burn things on it, or other similar things, should not profit from it without being harmed.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is none, and there is no medicine present, then he should put his index finger on the wound as we have said, and firmly press until it is painful in the wound and in the vein; and he should not move, but his finger should be cold often that it is not frozen and swollen and painful; and he should prepare the tools beforehand for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "In this is the second book of surgeries
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	For the first chapter of medicine, we have told you about all diseases that require cauterization or burning, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterization; and I will go to this chapter as my own way because it is lighter to carry when one goes.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	However, before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many methods of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have died so easily by the force of their disease, and the greatness of their malice; and these must be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And those who say to you: "Wait, I am here"; and the disease is disdainful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is only necessary that you allow those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not believe everything, but wisely of what you are certain, and what you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your maladies as for salus so is converted; and this will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three years' advice, Our Lords give you understanding and rightness of mind, and if you will seek help from the holy inspiration of her hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in determining by cauteries, according to which cauteries are before or after the chief joints, because you will find it more easily what you will do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full chief with sharpness.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Experts say that this disease comes from time to time in children at the breast, and when the nipple is pulled too hard on the child's chest; and never has it been found that it is caused by anything else.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease as being in children, and to these that I have seen it caused death; and for this it seems to me that I should mention the opening of the vein in part of the treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen an infant of the head being swollen, and the cheek grew every day until it could not support itself; and it was so much moisture that it caused death, and this moisture is assembled between the skull and the bone, between the ear and the skull; and the veins are such when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, which you should cut out of the cheek a large incision; and so long as the moisture persists, the form of the spatulum will be:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more intense, and the abscess is larger, then I make incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture reaches the bone, and you see the commissures of the chief overstretched in each part, and the wound gushes out when you press on it with your hand, and this has not been noticed before: then it may happen that you have to cut off the head III times according to this way:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the dressings and powders, and applying wine and oil, and leaving it on for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with poultices and compresses, and leave the head even, and then sew the dry flesh together as much as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at or open the large opening of the abscess, and the assembled angle; for it is never in front; never on the back; never on the left; and never on the right.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Make sure the size of the abscess opening and the angle of the arrow are according to what you can manage; and do not block the artery; and come down with blood loss, if the patient dies due to blood loss and evacuation of pus.
de reume	of the wound.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is any disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the face, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, therefore it is treated with cauterization if the two arteries are closed.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	1. It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient cuts off his head; afterwards, he rubs the leg with a rough cloth until the arteries are exposed, then he pulls the cloth tight around his neck with all the cloth; then look to see if the vein bends, and the two are after the ears, and few are responded; then sign the legs as they swell, then cop each with a sponge of vinegar of II parts, as the size comes near the bone, and that is by the wide head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	2. And if you see, cut off the sponge from the artery and wrap around, cutting as much as two does to the bone, and that is by the wide head.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is pierced, if it does not stop bleeding continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not bleed when pressed, then measure the amount of blood that spurts out, which should be about three drops; if it continues to bleed, pour some oil on it and press hard until the wound stops bleeding; then look at the wound: if the blood does not stop flowing from the bone point, if the incision made does not reach the bone, then strain the wound and sew it, and keep the wound clean until it heals.
de emigrainne	The first sentence to translate is "de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the head begins to ache, and the fever rises, due to moisture in the tears and sweat on the temples, and sometimes other symptoms appear, and it is treated with medicines and all that does not benefit, if we strangle the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient has many hairs on his temples, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly repaired; and if it is repaired, then draw the scalp of the patient with the hair, then frot the scalp with some rough hair, and wet the scalp with hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatula of the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly burn the light skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up with your nails, and remove many threads that are loose from each part; and if the artery is subtle, and the turn is at the tip of the uncinate, then the cope of that part follows according to the number of II chiés.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cooped, then it will not be done at all without any pain.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out five sancdes of VI c/, and if the artery is large, then it will be done by drawing it through two strong silk threads of double thickness, so that nothing comes before the wound, and comes off with the blood; then cut off the superfluity that is between the II liiens in that hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization is hot enough to burn the bone as much as the chiés are cooped; and this is the best work, if the malaide has no fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is help to finish the moisture: because it is of greater help to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is necessary to extract the arteries with soft cloth and make good tents; and when you loosen them, if you are careful with dry medicines that make water flow, and tents as much as possible, until they are healthy; and if there is no cort of the artery as you do, then if you have to use cauterization or the patient's arm which is not yet inflamed, and make it cool with cold water as much as possible, and hold it so that it does not freeze, and if you are wounded and lighter in the extraction of the artery than in cauterizing the vein that you cut with II part, but the cuts should be sharp to last longer without causing more pain.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the head of the shoulder is too loose, it holds less tightly.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two points as many stitches as it takes to cover them, and then when you have tightened the two threads, hold the fire hot until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein between the two points; and they should be distanced between the two points because it is not safe to do this cautery all over; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending into the veins that are being held tightly by the force of the fire, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient twitching, and it seems that the hair of the paper is wet, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, if it has to do with this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	1. And it was called the "old "cure contused," and that is why you must cut the patient's hair who has this disease, then make three incisions on the front according to the length of the front; and one of the incisions is like the other two, but the others are made by cutting through the papers, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are made by cutting through the papers; and separate your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound is the quantity of three to the traverse joins; and you will have a piece of sponge and moisten the cloths for the patient's sweat to flow from the wound, then cut the spatule according to the part that is most affected.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	1. From the incision that cuts through the temple to the second incision; and scorches all that is between the two fences throughout the entire facial bone that is exposed to the bone, then I make another part of the third incision to the other second, and then extract this spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	2. If you prick in the first fence with the instrument called "cultellary," which is very sharp on one side and rounded on the other, do not be too sharp, and it is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	3. And cut the ribs towards the chest and the ribs towards the bone, and the bite as far as it reaches to the third incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And cut all the veins that hang down as much as the incision is continued until it opens a little more, and then another part is made in the middle to fit the other end; and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the leech for the blood taken; then put a piece of soft cotton in each fendure, and put flannels slightly wet in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep the stitches from coming out; and at the end of the day take off the linen, and apply a large amount of tincture of wormwood with olive oil, and other ointments with which wounds are treated, as long as it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	The first sentence translates to: "He takes off the hairs.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	The second sentence translates to: "If there is no cauterization practiced regularly, and you see the hairs growing long and thin, and the eyes burning, and the papers burned; and the skin becomes raw, and the wounds are inflamed, then you should be careful with these accidents, as those materials and this cauterization do not come from many veins, and the cure that is made of it, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	The third sentence translates to: "And you command the patient to pull his hair back, then make a deep cut along the front of his head, and another wide one below.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	1. And begins with the burning of the left temple to the right temple, and let there be an incision in the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the jaw; and when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out onto a sponge, then dip between the two lips of the burning and put cotton on it, and sew with linen; then wrap the rough edges with twisted wine and oil, and keep away from infection; when it is healed, if it comes to touch the bone as much as possible and begins to crackle, then the treatment of things that cause excision, which make char, follow.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and eight parts of cloth, and make a paste; and apply it to these wounds for healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earache
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that affects the ears is one of the four things: grains, beasts, mines, or similar things like that; or seeds, such as wheat, beans, peas; or things that flow, such as a rheum and a cold and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it affects the ear with a piercing or in some other way, and it does not fit well in the ear, do not make the ear hot.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the piercing, if no drop of violet oil or mender's oil comes out, then extract it; and I make the wound clean, and it snores when exhaling that comes out, and put on the ear pieces of linen or wool; and the ear is in the desus.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment often comes out once; and if it does not come out, then extract it with forceps as fine as possible, and the form is like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with forceps, it's good; if not, then extract it with fine forceps and a small double hook; and if it does not jump out, then make a loop of thread and cut the end of the cord or ear hole, and sniff what is inside the ear wax until it does not enter with the thread; then the treatment is formed, as we have said, since it comes out once in most cases; if it does not come out in this way, then take a piece of lint and put no instrument inside, and press the lint on the piercing or whatever it is, and extract it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, and you continue to press on the ear even if it causes spasm, and the manner of flicking is that you first clean the scalp with the patient's hand, and draw out the pus according to its strength, then hold the patient's hand between your hands and turn the ear towards the root, and make a small cut at the edge of the ear in the grease or where it hangs down; and the flick should be as a moon, as you go to the pinna, then the bone according to your strength, and the saliva drips into your mouth; and the cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is in and it swells, then apply the extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then apply the I spatumile subtly according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply the incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think the grain is moist from the ear, as long as you have done many pieces; then extract it with subtle tweezers and honey, as we have said, if the extractions are successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, if the grain is in the ear, it means that the patient should use a piece of cloth for dressing and enlarge the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them be cauterized on the same ear or where the wound is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it does not stay in place, it's a waste of time.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not hold in place, it's a waste of time. If you see, if you take one of the bones from the ear and the other from fire as soon as the more painful one is out, then make another piece of bone as soon as the wound is completely healed, as we have said in the ear.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small in size, like a pea and resembles something else, it is treated as we have said in the division; but if it is large in size, one can feel it, if the extraction is not done with forceps; and this is the lighter thing to do in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the ear's stones, if you treat it as we have said in the division and use distillations, but the cure does not benefit, then look at the ear with the sun: if there are no openings, if you take subtle forceps, and if there are none, then if the chain of coi is like this, it is the correct form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow and wide around.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And bite more gently in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then frequently form a total lock; do this often until both sides are affected.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey, then soak the linen cloth as I said in the wound; and if it does not work as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients used in the decision of the verse, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear using this instrument, then the form will be as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And let silver or gold be boiled in the small holes, and then strained through a fine mesh; and to press the distillation into a well-made copper instrument, and if you see the rasor and envelope around the point of cotton; then it will give off your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the case, and the case is in the ear; then dip the rasor into all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes from the ear; and it will feel the patient's pain, and so are the distillations in the poch eschaufee at the same time as they are distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine will not be effective if it is too cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the fever of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some ear infection; and this very same thing happens due to fever or a wound in the ear, and there is no sign of any discharge from the ear, unless one can see; and there has never been any sign of pertussis, but it is seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes out first, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of healing in other situations, and in that case it is necessary to put the ear with the wound under the sun; and look: if you see the apparent opalescence, then the ear has completely cured of this spasm of coi ci, it is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be and stretch it out before and after all the ear, if it does not hurt the ear; if the inflammation is of the ear or the side of the ear, if the fingers are subtle and the cuff lightly, as long as that part is entirely covered.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the inflammation is in the ear, take a soft and light rasping and heat the foot slightly, then put it on the side of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that your patient feels in the ear, gently pierce, and be careful not to hurt the ear nerves; then put in the ear a tent according to the large depression of the ear, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Do nothing until the wound is healed, or take a tent and pour hot rosewater on it, and sprinkle powdered vitriol; and if you see smoke coming from the ear, then tear down the tent and move another soft tent made of oil of roses and wax into place as soon as the smoke disappears; then the cure will be complete.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. If the wound pours out blood, then dip a sponge in cold water and drape it over the ear, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the flow of blood which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the parchment's folds
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the first line to translate:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it is not cut, then the cautery of the fine cautery lenticulaire subtil, and the cautery after the incision is worthless; and they are repeatedly repaired, with nothing coming from their roots; and when those roots are cauterized by fire, they are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gresle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many things come in papers from the eyes that seem rough and hard in their form and their strength, and for this disease is called "granulation," and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper on both sides; the treatment is as follows: first, when the granulation stops on one side and the other, it is a light thing to know; then make it larger, then scorch each part slightly, then take it with tweezers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot perceive it with your senses, a little paper, if it causes no harm to the patient; and if it is sharp, if it is assembled with stitches, and cured as much as possible until it is healthy; and if it is small, if it does not require force, because the restoration of the surrounding skin will be sufficient.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the snow is hanging down from the edge of the ear towards the part below, if reversed, and the snow is grasped with tweezers, and is pressed from both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no harm; and when the snow is clamped, if the salty tears are lifted from the eye that rejuvenates as much as possible until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is made from the papers of the sheets, and this happens more as children become men, and they grieve for their hair, and they come to the baths in the mornings, and they cannot see the light of the sun because the tears flow to their hair; and because they sleep on it, they soak their pillows with the moisture that exinach produces, and their appearance becomes covered with the grease.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the hair between your fingers and feel the exinach enter your hands.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the cautery is that the physician puts his finger in the patient's mouth; then he takes a cloth and makes a circle according to the quantity of ointment contained in each part, and puts it on; and presses with both hands, so that the ointment is assembled in the circle; then they make a small cut in the skin at the corner of the mouth, not larger than the wound made in the gum of the mouth; and then they sew it tightly so that you can see the wound; and in other positions, the wound comes from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of greasy white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Pull the thread through all pieces of cloth between your two hands, and turn your left and right hand in such a way that it is scattered; and make sure you do not pull on the fringe, that you do not go to any part of the spool, that you do not cut it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. If the thread does not open at the beginning of the fringe, then lightly open it as soon as it appears; then pull it as we have said, and then fold the cloth in half and in quarters, and put it on the nail, and straighten it.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men break their sails and put them on to corrupt the moisture that is already made.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor when he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes to the leukemia, then the doctor pusses it out as much as he can when he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers' hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs that are not their own, and are awakened, they cause harm to them, and bring on diseases such as tears and the softening of papers and albugines, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is done in four ways: either by burning together with fire, or by medicine according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and is made by cutting and sewing or by nails, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	1. It is necessary that you place the head of the patient's arm in your hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert an awl into all the threads of the thread; and let the margin of the paper or the hair that comes from these hairs be at the edge of the paper, and turn the thread at the raseur; then cut in the part of the paper, straighten the hair, all over the suture coping, from the large larmier to the small; then draw out the thread, and put a small tent of cloth and drape on the paper after, and sew the figure on the paper according to the amount that you see lifted by the paper that is designed for it.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body is skilled in handling paper in large quantities according to its type, then cut it into all the lines you have written, starting with the largest lock at the beginning. Then, use a sharp knife to cut through the hair on one side of the natural hair roots as they grow, then cut the nail at one of the two angles. Then, scrape off the rest; then sew the two lips together with a needle made from one thread of fine linen, and draw out the sand, and trim the excess threads on all parts of the cloth, if you see this done; and if not, then leave the stitching and threads as they are for three or four days; then treat the wound with sewn stitches made from dry and constricting things, because the paper relaxes under the plague of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is dead (as the ancients say), and this is overwhelming if not treated properly; and if in another way: and it is that you see the paper of a figure which is also like the fur of a marten, as we have seen, at three incisions according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then come those who overcome with equal force according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	Then come those who overcome with equal force according to the form that is here: If you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or a thread, and pull it out; and take another thread of about the same length as the largest one, and the smaller one, and assemble the threads evenly; then gently press with your hand evenly, and gently sew all the seams where you have cut, until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so that the pain is relieved and the swelling decreases; and never come that the hair of the paper is converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The patient is treated for rabies if it appears in this form: and you will convert the paper according to what I have said, and then make the cures by art, and tie them as subtly as the paper and the threads are long; and cope as the heads of the parts you hold the threads for; then assemble one and the other subtly under the paper of the oil, and tighten the ties of the parts; and leave no others, and the skin which is stretched will wither, turn black, and become wrinkled, as long as it hangs on it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, and the wound has forces, then treat as soon as possible; and if the wound is infected, and the paper is raised, and the hair does not grow back, and this is the shape of the two canines you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The incision is so deep that you will need a fine needle, and a strand of fine silk; then assemble the ends subtly, and make the length of the threads one palm long; then take another subtle thread of silk, and thread the other end; then put the female of the thread in your mouth; and if the incision is declining, because it is a subtle and small incision, then take the needle through all the chase at the root of the natural hair, and make it percute in the paper as much as you pull the natural hair; then pull the hair until it reaches the end of the chase, and cut in the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then pull your hand as soon as the hair comes all the way to the end of the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	When the fur is removed and it does not return with the hair, if you mistreat the fur at the end of all that you have ordered, as long as the fur comes out in patches and you see it through the oil; therefore, if you mistreat the fur and the oil, close the oil and leave the fur closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the tail is born; and if the fur is short, if it is accompanied by one long hair of nature, and is cut with that which you have left it, as long as it is elongated and then tied.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fatness
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the oil comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of the ointment is to apply the suture, and dry the lips, and put on linen pads, and leave them as long as they are healthy; and it is only necessary to use in the cure of the things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease worsens than the first; but the work of things that soften, like fenugreek; and the root of wormwood or any other seed of linseed are cooked, and all oils become flawed, and they envelop a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure if you guard that it does not sound like according to its form as it was before; and these observations we have said are none that this disease has returned according to its form as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the horse that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease called "aphonia" is truly called "aphasia," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and burns and cauterization and things similar; and the sight of the overture in the eye is that you prescribe an awl, if it has two filaments, and the fillet in the chariot, and you make it perceive the left arm as much as the right, so that the fillets come in the head of the chariot; then the chariot is at the end of all the awl, and the cap is in the large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the paper returns to its place according to what it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the fire, and turn the paper, and make as many furnaces as the paper demands; and let the ends of the angles of the incision you have made be like those of a letter that has no "I griesche"; then this char, according to the quantity that your costez is as good as it can be, of what teaches the paper, then adjust the other parts, and the cost of one thread of linen; then the cure of what we have said about the mollifying medicines and tents, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	1. If the disease comes from frostbite or freezing or burning, then it is necessary to remove a simple cut of hair from the paper's threads according to what is before; then tear between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the shape of the disease, as it varies in shape, and the skilled masters are equipped with everything that can be returned to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary to cut and extract in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	2. If you do not want to use paper, you can use a piece of cloth or
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. When this cauterization comes to the hands of women in such a way that the paper on it is stained with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it comes to pass that you cut the point of a razor with the wet paper, and lift it up; and the tweezers are used, as long as you touch what is exposed in the subtle sweat, which is neither too much nor too little, so that the patient does not suffer from too much or too much oil; and your incision, which you scrape with that assembled one, lightly, so that the paper reforms according to its natural form; and it becomes healthy for all assembled, and never causes any harm in the hot, salty oil, and raises the sweet and warm oil; then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put on the oil fine wool in an abundance of ointment; and afterwards, after the third use of col sauce and other things until it is clean.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the finger of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the finger is: it is nervous and resembles a hard stone, and another that is not nervous but resembles a cold waxy frozen pimple, which when touched with iron and cooked with pincers, if not melted, it; and both resemble toward the great alarm, and grow pock after pock until it covers all the eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision if the surgeon puts his finger in the wound, then he operates on the pits; and gently take the paper with your hand, then take the finger with tweezers of small force, and hold it at the base; then take a needle, and put the horsehair, or the sheep's hair, or the beef's hair, and the strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and the thread through the finger, and perforate all the needle, and tie the finger with a thread and hold it at the base, and scrape all the hair that grows on the finger which supports the prickle and the silk at the chief, then cut off the remaining in the root of the alarm as subtle and as small forces as possible, and leave the natural or alarming, so that by the incision does not come to the eyes accustomed tears; and never has the finger been at the nail only, and gradually, as we have said; then it is scorched on all the spatumile souef of coi ci is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the spatula away from the charred skin and it won't break, and the needle should be clean; then the oil is poured into a small piece of silk, and a lancet is made of litharge, and it is left until the next day; then the care for what has to be done to make it healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the corners cannot enter, this appearance of the nail has been treated with many remedies; and I have seen it in division, and if you see it closed, then use oil from the salve, and take a light spatula point according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	The patient should gently remove the ring from their finger, and if they see that it is not tightening or stretching, it means that the oil has been distilled from their mouth into the colier made of litargire and red dou coliere, and it sets the oil on fire. Then, they should continue with the next step according to this same work, until it is completely dry.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing against it in the oil, like a hot punch, then the milk, and first cure the hot punch as soon as it is safe, then continue with the opening if possible, as before, as soon as it is safe.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	When the flesh of the arm appears dark in the morning in the oil, if it is swollen in the bone, and a part only does not, that tears do not come; then it distills into the oil that is red and sour, which is made from litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that has been pricked by the thorn
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men have never had any red flesh pricked, and they cut the thorn and wrap it in papers and tapes, and it looks like a rose of balsam; and when the wound is such that the physician puts his finger in the patient's mouth, then he presses the flesh, and takes all this red flesh as uncinable threads to the patient, and supports it with strength; then cut the first red flesh, and cut all of it until the end, and keep the oil away from the wound; and the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the thumb and small forces of the hand, if it is done after this chapter as we have demonstrated; and when the incision is completed and takes all the flesh, if you apply the oil of seil broiet or distilled red vinegar and medicines corrosive on it, and put it over the wound with a piece of linen, if it is assured of apotheme chaut; and if it does not cost anything, and the without hand surpasses the ointment, and you doubt apotheme chaut, if leaves the oil and cures apotheme chaut of things calming apotheme chaut; then return to your wound as soon as it is healthy, and then make many small chars est ajostee in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	1. But it is necessary that you apply the cure to every weak point of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in fire cautery; and do not thrust your hand into any of these burns until you see that the member is sound in that burn.
des voines des eulz	2. of veins of hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	The first sentence translates to: "There are red wounds that are covered with oil, and they are touched to the eye and the oil is removed from all sides.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil, and if it is red, it is a sign of inflammation, and there is no other disease than this one; therefore, treat it in this way: instruct the patient to place their head on your shoulder, then apply the ointment to all the wounds according to your judgment, and make sure the ointment is applied in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let the ointment be applied in layers of one degree according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you should gently pull on the veins, and let the blood flow after another, as long as you can see the veins moving out of the skin; and do not prick the skin with the points of your nails, and make this incision at noon before the sun, and be careful in your incision so that you do not cut deeper than the veins; and when you have done this, if you distill the oil becomes green and red to corrupt what is inside.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot distill all of it at that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave some for later as long as the pain is soothing and sure of aposteme chaut, then resume in this manner which is before as soon as it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the oil fissure
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If the fissure is called an "arissati fistula," then treat it with cauterization and burning medicine according to what I have previously mentioned, and if it is not cured, then incise it at the site of the abscess, and let out all the moisture that is in it, as long as the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, if all the instruments of this kind are made of iron; and it is called "spry chief," and should be made firm in the chief, and should not be pointed like a lime but as it is in its present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put the corrupt bone on the floor, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand for a short time as you feel that corruption is removed; and do this only once, then restore the bone with medicated ointments.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If you hear the sound and feel it, and the belly is also affected, and the abdominal wall is felt, and it remains for 40 days, and it does not improve or become infected, and no other remedy than bringing the fistula back to the navel according to this form: and if you remove the second time from the bone with a hammer and with medicated ointments, and when it is discovered that it has been infected in accordance with this form, and the head of the hammer is at an angle of 3, and the fistula should be thinned as much as possible according to your view:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the handle of the lance on your shoulder, and move your hand away from the oil, then turn the entire forearm until it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you are holding your hand on your neck; and then restore the dry medicine limbs as I have shown you, and when the child is born and hardened by the labor, if the matter is in the neck, then it is a lighter thing for the midwife.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil's issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the child is completely open and there is no relief in the bladder, and there is no release in the neck, and the midwife cannot relieve the pain, then you must lie down on the patient; then apply a warm compress or heat without hurting with sugar, then place it on the oil and make it from aloe and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, then strain the oil, and apply it to the wounds and cloths; if the cloths are too wet, double each by four, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the child has used; then strain the oil into a hard bowl, and resume the compress with heat without hurting; then release the compress and let the oil be strained all night and in the morning, and if you see the wound healing, it is good; but if not, then release the ointment and cloths and the compress as soon as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A sudden fall of the eye socket
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a sudden injury occurs in the eye socket, it opens up and reveals papers as if they were grains of resin, and it is difficult to see; therefore, cover your eyes, and the ovary is such that you can insert an awl at the root of the part of the eye that is swollen and affected by the injury, then insert another awl where there is a double thread of the part of the arm; and perceive, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut off the double thread and pull out a part of the eyeball, and hold it firmly, and draw out the awl and put on the end of it some ointment in abundance on the wound; and leave it until the threads heal with the eye, and cure the ointment with comforting things as long as the wound is sore; and never leave the wound without the eye being surrounded by a circle of cloth, as long as it is sore.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs grow long and even, if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil's bag
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is only bags of oil that are assembled in the oil, appearing as if they are descending, but they are not; and the appearance of the dislocation if you do it correctly is to have the patient sit upright and straight, then take the chief between your hands at the second part, and pull it as far as you can see the bag coming to your eyes; then close your eyes, and do not descend and do not be lightened by the light, and see what the patient does as if it were; and if it does not descend, think that it is sore, and if the bag descends from the eye is not assembled as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you hold the patient in your hands, then take the steel probe and make a small incision on the corneal membrane, as far as the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal membrane and the cornea, until the bow is out; and when it comes out, let it drip into the cold water mixed with honey, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and mixed with honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is cured.
des aigues de l’oil	of the water of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearances of water in the division, and when it comes to test; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you place the oil between your hands crossed, facing the light of the sun, and let the healthy and tight hair grow long; then take the paper of the oil to your left hand if the hairs are on the left, or to your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the hairs are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the hairs are on the right; then place the point of the instrument at the coronet through the hole of a ring in the oil at the smallest part of the coronet; then push the instrument called "almagda" gently, and twist your hand until it pierces the coronet of the oil, and feel that almagda enters the empty space; and it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda hole be at the end of the spiral which is in the prunes; and this is the coronet of the oil; if you see the bone in the paper for the clarity of the corneo-skin, then place the instrument where the oil is, then press the skin deeply along another line after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it stings now, if the patient sees the physician in front of them and the instrument before them.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, if it stings again, open the second way, put on the forceps with the instrument, and when they are fixed and do not move, gently twist your hand a few times; then insert a few drops of ointment through the hole, and remove the instrument.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply the ointment with fine powdered rose oil and plenty of blood, and glue it with the healthy ointment.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those who are ours, we put on like a glove with plenty of blood.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the hammer cannot enter the hole due to its hardness, because it has too many hard hairs, then you must grasp the instrument called "alberit", and its form is:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And by perforating only the joint, and not causing too much damage, but making a small hole, as we have said; and at the end of the work, the patient feels lighter, and lies down on his back in the dark room; and he should make no movements, eat light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and follow his disposition; then he leaves this house in the same state as before, and shows us that he has seen nothing, and then he puts the link back in its place, and we see that he has made this change either during the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary to do this, because the pain increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the patient feels pain, you should apply oil to the affected area in front of the septum, and follow the instructions provided by the person who is assisting; once it is calmed down, remove the eye and put it on your face or forehead to cover any joint, and be careful in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then, go into the house quietly and discreetly, and prepare yourself for this case; be careful, as no disciple should interfere in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came to us who were from Yrach, who told us that in some places it was done for the almagest, but we have never seen anyone do it on our land, nor have we ever read about it in ancient books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of amalgama, because those who do not know them by sight; and they are truly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the cross and the nails.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No time are born or nails of crosses different, and if there are any that seem like scorpions at the mouth of piers; and if it is such or has a cross enchanced with foxy color, and if it is a cross of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these crosses which are not enchanted, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun; and operate on the nostrils, and moisten the horns on those crosses, and pull them out; for fear that you do not hold them too tightly on one side, until you see that the cross is all out.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing else that can be done, if you examine all the struments subtly and lightly, without causing any harm; and if it does not overturn you, or cause an apoplexy, if it seizes you and you cauterize as soon as possible, before the wound becomes inflamed and all bones are charred, then gently apply ointment or a poultice of wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the patient does not respond, and moisture comes to the palace, signs that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, signs that it has charred in the bone of the limb, or that the struments cannot be cut: therefore it is necessary to bind a thread of linen around a large knot, and be careful with your hands, and place the struments at each nook or less; and put the head of the shoulder on the child's chest as soon as it comes out through the nose, and carry it in an odorous way until it reaches the mouth; and often make the child do this in schools, and it is a light thing for those who see it; then hold the chief that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other chief that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and guide them after each other as we guide the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Do whatever you can to recognize that the newborn's face has become corrupted with that charm, then cut off the male child's penis, cleanse the blood, and moisten the male child's penis with Egyptian ointment, and return it to its proper place in front; do this 3 or more times until all of what was corrupted by the charm is healed; then put a piece of cloth in the penis for as many days as it remains healthy, and if it has skill in drying herbs, use it; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the child's face, or it is used to distill oils and medicines or the like:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a cane, and guide it thusly; and if you see, if I make the cane close, and let the ends be flat to expel the grease; and have an handhold at the head for holding it when heating the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the charge on the new one
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times it is found at the head of a new disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large, until it is seen when looked at; and therefore it is necessary to cut it at the beginning, and then remove the bone entirely, then place the cautery or burning medicine; and if it is delayed as long as it is large, if it is hard, of a fuscous color, of poor sensation: if it is not touched by iron for it is enchanted, because whenever it is touched, no matter how, there is always great harm to the patient; and if the enchantment is of so much touching, not of a fuscous color, and you see that it can be covered, if the patient is seen and the malaide is cope with little pain, and cure the leu of things drying and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the shoulder joint is cut and crushed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long, and it is rare in any man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore that if there is no solution in any man, look at whether the wound is fresh all around his vein; and then rest the lips on a girdle, then cure it as soon as it is healthy; and if the lips are already raw from both sides, then shave all the parts that are getting better as they heal, then tie the lips together with a girdle, extract them, and powder them with dragon's blood powder, and incense the cinders; and put on the powder a piece of a plaster of some other soothing plaster, and leave it until it dries, then cure the ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is as follows: if you assemble the solution, either by needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitching; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of lip wounds
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lips of the wounds of the lips are hard and rough, resembling grains of sand, and smaller and larger; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut them each time on a different part, and then use the needle after the incision of vitreol wire, as long as it is not stained; and then the leaven of the salve, and cure the leaven of things dry until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	The first line of the text is "de la char des gencives.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, the girdle of the thigh is disturbed, which they call "albulus"; if you can support it with your nails, and the cloth at its root, and leave the wound or the sanc; then put on the leg a vitriol plaster, or other restraining and desiccatives powders; and if the girdle returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the cloth second time, and cauterize: if it does not return much after the cautery; and these are the forms of the stitches.
des sordens	The next line is "des sordens.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No times are assembled at the root of the teeth, where the mouth is between the cheeks, gums that are harsh and sharp; and no times is the black and citrus tooth, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and it is the blackened tooth; if it comes that you place the tooth between your hands, and its roots are in your holy hand, and you expose the teeth or the gums openly, as long as it does nothing; and then I make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as they are painted; and if this is at the first reason, it is good; but if not, then resume in the second day and the tooth, as you have done everything; and you should know that the teeth have different forms of estrumens to make them laugh, according to what the demonstration shows, because the raser that raises the teeth has other shapes than those that are raised between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you revealed.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	1. It is necessary when you treat the pain of the tooth that you delay as long as possible and as much as you can, because it should not be otherwise; for it is a substance that is very hot in nature, therefore there is no excuse for not treating it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	2. When the patient is forced to endure treatment, then you must be certain of the tooth's pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	3. Many times the pain of the patient's tooth increases, and it must be made certain that the tooth is not sick, and the tooth is treated; and it should not depart from the pain as long as the patient is being treated, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones; and when you are sure of the tooth's pain, if you must cut into the tooth all along its root, then use a sharp tool at first and then use smaller tools; then tighten the nails well in the first place and then in the second, until they are well fixed; and make sure the patient's teeth are well held in your saint's hand between your fingers, and hold them so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth with a clean break, and if it does not break, then take none of these string-like things and gently pull out from each part, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are felt and pulled out, then it may be necessary to fill them with linen; and if the extraction is done subtly with needles, which does not break the tooth; and it is wise to overturn the girdle to clean the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well advised that you do not break it, and there remains a part, and the patient suffers from the malevolence of the root, greater pain than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	The patient should not attempt to make a cut like the ignorant healers who, with their haste and hardiness, break the skin no time at all, and cause no harm that we have known; but they bring about nothing by the fever of this great disease, either from the roots that they drink, or from the cut that they make, as often as we have wished; and if the wound is deep, cleanse it with wine or vinegar and herbs; and if the poison comes out, which often happens, use vinegar and vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the wisdom teeth, whether they are still in the gum or not, are long and large incisors, which do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large size if they do not break when pulled, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have teeth to hold onto.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth breaks when pulled, if it comes that you must put on the gum a soft cotton ball for one hour or more.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as it is smoothed, then it will remove the tines called "alderfri," even if the head seems to be a beard of care; and they should be made in this way like a lime and that is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out through all these pricks, then you must pull the tooth entirely out of the root, and then insert the instrument called "athalie", which is a type of tweezer, with this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is very large and does not break the skin, and if the root jumps through this, it is good; otherwise, if you need help from all the instruments, and the forms come after like this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you need help from this instrument with two rings, and the form is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front in the reason of teeth, and this instrument with large pricks, which is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	1. If the bone is too hard to break, and it has few fragments of bones; and others, which are not so easy; and the surgeons use their instruments skillfully, according to what their experience and the disease they demonstrate, because they have some diseases or the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of bones and they do not break at the wrong place or other bones, or they pour, if they seek estruments that I said, and help with gestures, according to what is shown in the figure:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	1. And may be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not break, but can hold and support; and then restore the medicine corresponding to this, and if there is in the bone exudation, and it is small, if all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not to fit naturally in the gum, and it forms an ugly shape, and in women, if it is broken after the tooth, and it is not straight, and it cannot be soaked or polished: therefore the root; and if it is pulled with the tooth, then use this instrument whose form is like this small tooth, and it should be sharp and hard:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the grip is small and small in hands because of the hardness of the tooth, and this is why you cannot move the others, and if it is visible, then it can be polished, if the part of the tooth is like this form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	1. And it comes as if the bone of a bird is made like an eagle's claw; and in the bone, the point is small and small in the hands, so that it does not move until it catches hold; then the flatness at the end has no roughness, and the teeth are too sharp and they cut the tongue, if it comes to tightening the string as much as possible, without making the tongue crooked or corrupting the speech.
quant li dent lochent	2. When the point of the bone is small and small in the hands.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	3. When the point of the bone is small and small in the hands by pressure or by blowing, and the patient cannot press on it as much as it holds, and you should treat them with restrictive medicines, and that is enough; if they are to be restrained by a golden thread, because the silver threads turn green and rot, but the gold does not, and if the thread is too thick or too thin, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, if you take the thread and double it between the healthy teeth, then put the ends between the crooked teeth, as long as you see sensibility in the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering from the part where you began, and gently and wisely move your hand, so that it does not move at all; and if your thread is at the root of the tooth, so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then they sew the head of the string to a nail, and assemble it, and place it between the healthy tooth, and put it in so that it does not bend the tongue; and then they let it be tightened as much as possible, and if it slips, or the string comes off, if it is tied with another string; if it stays and holds all its tension, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the incisors of the two healthy teeth and the two canines, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is sewn, if it is removed from the gum, again and again, as we have said; and it does not become loose until it is sharp and painful, and never takes on the form of a bone chip, and it is placed in the gum where the deficiency is, and it is tightened as we have said, and stays tight, and lasts long:
de coper lou liien de la lengue	The tongue of the language of the mouth is dislocated, and it cannot be moved, and the patient suffers
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is there ever a tongue that comes out of the mouth or nature, that is not known; or by accident of wounding; and the language is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and it is in its proper place, and the tongue is in its proper position, and it is held firmly by the physician's hand; then loose the nervous tongue as much as possible, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it bite or cut, and it is due to pain, if the upper tooth bites and cuts the lower lip; and hold the tongue so that it does not become too much, for the artery which is out of place; and when you have done, if the tongue is red and swollen, or cold, then place the tongue in a linen tent; and the physician marks each night the patient's tongue, so that the patient may know.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the dislocation is away, if the joint is not hot, if it is cauterized with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then the care of another care until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be red or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is gangrene; and if it is deformed into a blindness, and it has moisture, if it flows pus, and it is made with a subtle sponge, and it is delivered from one part and another; and if it is not painful in your wound, if the joint is heated with vitral broth until it is infected, then return to your wound as soon as you can bear everything; then raise the limb easy and soft, and the care of other cares until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	The first sentence to translate is "des apostemes de la gorge". A literal translation
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never comes the gorge boces that are called "godath", and they are properly the II amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healthy, then hold: these are small and of colorless, if they do not touch iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, if it does not touch iron at all, then for the loss of blood; but it will remain as long as it is dead, and then you will leave it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of blainche color and the root is subtle, if you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first look at whether the apostemes chalz are resting and are calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then I make the patient stand in the sun, and their head should be in their right state, and they operate the mouth and take the serum between their hands, and press the tongue evenly all around the instrument, regardless of whether it is silver or gold: and it can be fine as some beltbuckles.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue evenly all around the instrument, and see the incision, if you take the forceps and the needle in the lamb, and draw it as far as you can; and do not bring anything of the cloth with, then close the instrument, regardless of whether it is silver or gold: the handle is curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you have needles, then the form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be trenched on one side and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the hairs, if you cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, heat the blade with hot water, and make it sharp and smooth, and the sutures come out as soon as possible, if you heat the blade with hot water, or if boiling peas are cooked, or if mirtes are fried, and similar things, until the blade is not dampened; then the cure takes place as soon as it is healthy; and no other abscesses ever appear in the mouth except for the two hairs, if they are cut exactly like the two hairs.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with a wound that was not healing in her throat, which is to say it was a small abscess; and she had well closed almost all of the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the channel that was blocked, and could not drink or urinate, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been opened twice by the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I had thus opened it, and found a large piece of bone in one of the holes, and a smaller piece in the other hole, and closed the mouth and pressed the tongue; after opening the abscess in these wounds, and taking out a part, and only a little blood came out, and then the woman was able to swallow water and wine, and continued to cut down on this abscess by long pieces; the abscess grew larger and filled the hole that I had made, so that it could not pass through; therefore I sewed and cauterized the wound: afterwards she did not grow; and I went away from these parts, and only God knew what happened after me.
de l’uve	Of the uterus
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the uterus is drawn towards the vagina, and it is long and thin, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and round, it is called "uterus".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cut does not profit, and you see that the wound is calmed and subtle, and it is suitable to insert; and the one that is round and not long is assembled and not long; and it is bloody or has a red or black color, and it is suitable to avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore, when you see it, according to the method I have described, of the patient's gallbladder and length, that you should place the patient facing the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we made note of before; then remove the nail from the eye, and pull out the thread, and cut off the two ends as I said in the incision of the two amandines.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much beyond the natural termination; for if you cut more, it will hurt your voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two amandines, and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	If the patient suffers from great pain, then it is necessary to use engine for the cauterization of the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is sharp when it is hot fire.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the patient puts his head in your hand and then presses his tongue on the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and confines with hot live fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and by using the edge of this instrument, the form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a hair or puts medicine on his forehead, as the cat's ear, and places the instrument all over the medicine on the eye; and the patient is grimacing on his chest, if the saliva and mucus are coming from his mouth of the medicine given, if it does not go to the chin and throat, then hold your hand all over the medicine and press on the eye, as much as you see the pain and the medicine bites are eased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and thrust the instrument through the cotton into the medicine as much as the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and afterwards wait four or five hours or six; and if you have skill in re-cauterizing the medicine, if you re-cauterize, and after the cauterization of the mucus around the eye, wrap it in wool, and clean what is outside of the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and cure the gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision, only cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take care and yew, oregano, rosemary, chamomile, and all the herbs mentioned, assemble them all or none of them in one pot, and add water, and boil; and it can be well glued with strong earth, and the pot should have the instrument made according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it can be of silver or gold, and some of the heads are placed in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, as long as the eye is mortified; afterwards it resumes often, as the eye dries, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of abscess, because other things also come; and do not do this for the decline of abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If this instrument is not present, then take a catheter and insert it into the patient's mouth, if the mouth of the patient is too dry; for the crown of the tooth does not cause pain in the mouth, as the crown of the tooth does not grate the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened in the throat, either a bone or a fish spine, or nothing at all; therefore, if you must see what is there, and press the tongue against the instrument until you see the thing; and whatever does not open and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is cleared through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of herbage, or a piece of dry bread; and then wrap it with the sponge and then glutinous; and when it reaches the stomach, if it does not come back, and then draw it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, then use the instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	1. And let the patient's head be placed in the chisel so that it may enter more gently into the mouth, and the chisel should be held high above the epigastrium; and guard against touching the epigastrium, as all will suffer from it, and neither the bone nor the instrument should be bent; and it is best that the patient and the tool are bent, because they are both in need of it; if the bend is not made, or if it is made too much, so that it becomes uncomfortable, then it should be adjusted accordingly.
de la sansue de la gorge	2. of the neck of the mouth
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	3. No time is there for the medicine to be effective, as I have said in the division, by the use of medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the patient's mouth with the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the limb, if it is all of one piece or has fine hairs that are equal in value to this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth anything, if you take a fine hair and pull it through the mouthed needle, then pull or cut the hair and make this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And wet the needles every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full cold water, wet the eye, and make the mouth, and it feels like it is being sucked in, and move it to your hand often; and if the limb feels cold, then heat.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If she does not understand as we have said, if the patient is smoking afetide, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, as it will feel like a tar.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation if you prefer to use it or if there are charcoal fires, and put the cover of a covering cloth in the environment, and in the other part, place the head of the instrument; then your fumigation is ready, and the patient puts the end of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not enter, but goes to the stomach; and the stomach will now hurt, and if it recurs, do the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient's thirst, and drink salty and acidic things, and do not drink any lemonade; and then his labor will be done according to this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it is, when it can be seen, resembles tines of corbels to enter the mouth; it resembles the beak of a surgeon, and has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The cautery of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the abscesses are, according to what is remembered in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its own appearance itself, and due to it being moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And if it is by the legs or they are at the core.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the apostles of his head are different from those of his foundation, and the apostles of his lower limbs are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if in the apostles one does not know how to perceive, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if for such things it is necessary to perceive when they are thought to be, and do not die until their completion, like those of joints that are delightful.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when apostles come from delightful joints, and they are left as long as they are soft and supple, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	1. When the incision is too deep and affects the main limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is still alive, it will harm the main limb; or it is due to the foundation, if the hole is not made until it is dead; and only the incision that feels like it has completed digestion should be made, as the one that is due to the foundation, it will not cause any damage, and it will be long-lasting and form a fistula; and it cannot be cured in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	2. It is necessary that you scrape the wound of the incision that is dead according to its completion, and when the pain is eased, when the fever subsides, when the pain and the bruising are reduced, and there is no debate or agitation in the main limb, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the wound as close as possible to the base of the incision, and where it was opened; and the wound should be long enough to reach the hand or foot, or in joints and arteries, and in all places where there are no clots.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that prick, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, if it is large, you should leave the puncture until it has been confirmed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick before this, and the blood comes out of it, and it is painful to the touch; and by chance they harden the lips and become flat.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if no abscess is found according to the size of the blood, according to what the member can bear.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you open small abscesses, small wounds, and great ones according to their appearance; and in large abscesses, large wounds, and multiple fissures according to the size of the abscess; and if in such abscesses or they have to be cut off, and closed, then it is necessary to do so as with a button: and if in such ones that are cut at three angles, and in such ones that are closed like the thorn of a grape, as with abscesses of angry people; and if in such ones that are cut at one angle, and others at other angles and appearances, then they are closed like buttons.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	1. Those who lack a chief, if the superficial abscess is like aposteme, it is necessary that you open it gradually; and when the abscess is large, and the pus is great, and it has filled the entire wound, but only a part of it, then the abscess will subside in the other day, and then nothing more should be done to it; this is repeated many times until all the pus is out. Even if the woman is weak in virtue, or a young girl, or an old man with decayed limbs, it should be treated in this way.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectoration, there has been no occasion with the issue from the bowels, that by chance the patient died, and you do not remember it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have discovered the abscess, if the wound is infected, look at the size of the abscess; and if it is a small one, use a linen or cotton gauze; and if it is large, and there is fever, then wrap each in a gauze so that they compete with each other; and if you have cut into a part of leather with the abscess, and it has grown out, then wrap it with fine cloth or ragging of linen threads, and sew it to the bone as soon as possible, and then the skin, and the cure of ointment until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the dislocation occurs in the shoulder, it may cause you great pain and injury, so take care of your shoulder many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation persists, if it is not governed and treated, and the powders that I have mentioned in my hands in this book, and if you are afraid of the poultice, then you should make sure to put it on and dress the wound with a thin layer of vinegar and olive oil; and if it is like this, and the powder is dry, if you must put the wound dressed with cold water and oil, or with wine and oil warm, as we have said; then remove the poultice and the discharge and the treatment, as it comes, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This comes when it is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in their entirety: or you have said what one must do before the treatment of abscesses, and now this chapter.
des soros	of sore
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the head of the shoulder comes with bites from abscesses, and they are like those in the following ways, as we have seen, and it is like the grape vine, and many are similar.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It has many that are fat and similar when it is moist, as we have seen with poultry; and if they are hard and rough in the cutting, and there is no doubt that it will not be against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	1. And the measurements are such that if you measure it with all the instruments called "entromising," according to its form, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	2. If it contains moisture, then they will be made longer by the surgeon's hands.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	3. And when the moisture is seen, do not leave the hair that contains it, because it will return as soon as you leave it; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment if it is present; if not, use warm and wet compresses, and place the wound on another day; and whatever is left of the moisture will be removed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the thread resumes as before, on the second day, and the wound, until you see that it does not weep at all; then treat the wound with ointment according to the convenient time, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the gout holds for a long time, according to this form, it becomes very long; and it gnaws your bones, and scorches them all over, and applies all your care to draw out the fever; and if the artery is opposite, I will do as I have said after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And I also treat the gout if it is very painful, and cut it off and cure it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And he measures the incision for the abscess and the wound, if it is more gentle, because there are few sutures.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these incisions or wounds there is no moisture, and these are not from an old woman's nail; and I found the incision as a sharp, rough, and bluish piercing, which could not be cut; and if none were made, it was as good as a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other incisions or wounds, if these come from the head or chin, and the opening is as far down as possible, depending on the ear; and they are treated accordingly.
des scrophules	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	For the fire cautery, many times there are abscesses at the collarbone, and the screws are removed, and the angles are cut off, and never have any other part been cut or broken, and they are gnawed and twisted with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scar is properly formed on its side, as we have said, if the wound and the abscess are on the shoulder; and the appearances of these scars are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	It is said that there are certain things that contain moisture, and that there are also malignant things that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case, where you see a good arrangement of the tochier, and it resembles the color of the corselet, and is silent in every part and is not equal to the artery or the conduct, and is not equal to the skin; if it comes that you cut it through, and burn it in every part, and the lips of the keur are burned, and the oncines are also burned, if you can bear it, as we have said in apostles, and the trai is small and small, and you are sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and are not equal to the spatumile or the trenchans, that the hands do not slip, and do not see too soon, that you do not cut anything more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you prick the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol beads or any powder that remains sanguine in the wound, and stretch the wound; and leave it until the inflammation is soothed and the wound is softened, and it will begin to ooze.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And if the wound is not cleaned, then return to your vein as soon as you have finished; then look at your index finger to see if it has any small pustules, such as blisters or boils.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if the wound is a large boil, then only cut out that boil at its root, but leave the surrounding skin intact with a double strong thread, and let it dry naturally; then apply the cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you manage to cover the entire wound, it is necessary to assemble the two lips of the wound, and then close it now, as there is no excess material due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you can understand how to cover the root of the tooth and draw it out, and then cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those wounds that have excess material should be cut open if possible; and the cut should be made in the same way as the one mentioned earlier, then treat it with ointment and similar things, so that it does not become corrupted; and when the wound is healed, if the cure of ointment causes inflammation, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the shoulder
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the shaping of the jaw; but I have never seen anyone do this in our time, and it is written in their language.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with dislocation of the shoulder, it is necessary that the incision made, called "epiglottis," be avoided; and no help can be given in this case because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the ears.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from dislocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiphysis, that we cut it at a distance of three or four circles or one small cut through, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut, and not in the cartilage; and then they are easy to section of the epiphysis as there is no char, and the vessels are long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are too tight, then it extends the jawbone to the entire neck, and then cuts the knot as it comes to the neck; and avoid the vessels of the sinus, if you see nothing, and then cut the face, as we have said; and is demonstrated by the section of the bloody gouche that jumps through the broken bone which is fractured, and by the lack of voice; and leaves the wound overturned a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed since the injury, gather the two lips of the wound as much as they can, and press on all sides to touch the cartilage; then administer medicines that make the patient feel better, as long as they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not do anything until the patient's mouth is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the lack of meat.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, you must operate on the epigastrium because the patient cannot breathe, and they are dying by the wound, and you must keep them alive; and therefore, the ancients commanded to leave the wound overgrown until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And therefore, they commanded to cut the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured. And I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden is hurt and cut, and she has a piece of cloth in her throat, and part of her neck is cut; and I was called to cure her, and I found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that came from it, and although she did not have much vein or lead to her arm, the blood was coming from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I quickly examined the wound and cured her as soon as she was healed; and she did not return until she was dead, and then returned to her position; therefore I say that in the cutting of the epigastrium there is no great pain.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large jaw
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernia of the neck is called "hernia of the jaw," and it consists of large hernias in a yellowish color, and is more common in women; and there are two ways: natural and accidental; or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is in two ways: one is like fatty tissue, and the other is similar to an hernia that comes from the artery; and if it is painful, and it does not matter if you overdo it with a small one, and test and search for all the introitus: if you touch it as I am fat, and cannot find any wound, if the cope, so as to cope the thighs, and take all its skin, if there is none; and close well, and cure as much as it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	Of course, I understand your
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of us, and I will tell all the appearances; and it comes that I make all the difference between newborn and birth.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is calm and fever holding, as the fevers are not passed, and they are completed with the appetite; therefore, the fever and the calmness rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the newborn there is no fever, calmness, or pain, and contains I syfac, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the heart, and becomes thus like a girdle, and becomes big; and they are according to the appearances I mentioned in the division, either dry or moist, and the color is so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	1. It is necessary, when you come to the patient's care, that you examine and first ask about all the instruments called "dislocater" according to what their form brings or is mentioned in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	2. The manner of investigating the abscess is that you press or add more moisture to the wound than you remove in the abscess, and turn your two hands many times until you see that the swelling has given way, then according to the size of the abscess; then take out the dislocater and hold tightly.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	3. If moisture is present, its color will be such, as with other abscesses; and if no moisture comes after the dislocater, see that it is thick, if then it is crossed, and take it with forceps, and scarify each part carefully, and open the wound wide enough to insert the knife without causing pain to the patient. And if you cannot insert the knife without causing pain, do so in pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not respond, if it returns to us many times; and if it costs a piece, and it does not grieve us, if we apply the wound with some corrosive powders, and stretch the wound, and put soothing things on the inflamed cheek, and cure other wounds as much as possible until it is healthy; and if it is large, if we cut the lips of the wound, and cure the one who causes the pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the wound is bent against you or otherwise, if you haste and use the leather of melted glass, and let it lie for two or three hours, until the wound stops bleeding and the inflammation subsides, then return to the cork that was used.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the claws are of different shapes, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if the claws have three kinds of beaks; and if the claws have three kinds of beaks and are of three kinds; and if the claws have two kinds of beaks and one kind of beak and are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their legs.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these are sharp, and such as cannot cut even one part, which is why we scar the body, because we do not cut the vein or nerve; and these penetrating things are returned to knives, so that the surgeon does not get lost among the incisions; and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they should be used only in the legs, like arms, hands, fingers, and toes, and in similar places; and never made into another instrument, resembling scalpels, according to this form, although it is not possible to cut with them:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed on none at strength of veins, and arteries, and never returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Ne ever flare the breasts of others men when they come to be corrupted, as they seem breasts of women; and become lank and swollen, and who see them cure, if it comes to follow this form of this line .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scorch the fat, and use the wound of medicine charged with fire, then stitch the lips of the wound to sew, and cure as long as it is healthy; and if the breasts are leaned down, and become rough because of their size, like women when they make the wounds in the costals; and if one holds the other at the end of each and every one, so that the smaller line contains the larger according to this form, from this line .b. until .g.; then scorch the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not all made, because the patient does not rest, or due to the decay of blood, if it comes that you fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it has absorbed the exuding blood and fat, then cure as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is "des apostemes des asselles". The translation is
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These apostles that come from the sores of the horse are ways to scrophule hard nails or claws, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, which contain moisture must be coped according to this form, along the line .b. and .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bow is in the apostle, if you use the plaster of fine cotton, and leave it until the next day, then take out all the cotton and treat with ointment as necessary until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scabs, then it is like we have said in the thorns, and if the wound bleeds a lot, then perform cauterization as we have advised before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the blood flows out, if it happens many times with swelling, and also there is no pulse in the vein and swelling; and if you feel this swelling in your limbs, if it is painful; and when you feel it in your hands, if it is tight; and when it is from the vein, if it is loosened and angry and out of its place, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. It is necessary to shield the treatment of fire, and the one in charge must also do so, and in the one who is infected, it is necessary to shield them as well, and then cut the artery that is caused by being caught in the hair; then remove the thong, and pull it through the other side, and draw the artery tight with a double thread according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as long as it is not out, and so release the graft; then apply the treatment that follows, as soon as the wounds stop bleeding; then treat this as it appears, as soon as the wounds are healthy; and if the aposteme comes through the vein, then you must take in your hand what you need for the aposteme all along the vein, then cut the thread with your other hand, and feel it, and if it is double, then draw it from the other side; then close the aposteme as I have said, or the end of one of the two parts of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads do not come out, then use another thong to pull all the threads through the first thong, and tighten the threads in four knots; then close the aposteme as much as possible, then close the superfluity and leave what is tied; then put on a soft cloth with wine and oil, then treat the wounds and the ointments as much as possible when it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	For in the work of this chapter, when abscesses come into the artery and vein, they come from nerves that are too tight or due to too much effort, and similar things occur.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	1. This often happens with assistants and you must do it in all joints, and it is a great pain, and its color resembles the color of a corpse, and it is in many positions with pain; and when it is stretched, it feels like the patient's pain is increasing, but not as much as in the chest, but rather in the neck; and it is not very tight in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, and the one who is in the joints does not want to move by force: by chance, it has contraction; and those who are at the head or front, make the skin sweat.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the graft is small, and it is held with nails, and the root in its place; and if it is large, and it spends in the bone, and burns it, then the bone and assembles the wound at its place, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging jaws
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never comes in the belly and does not affect any other part of the body, and it is a disease called "funge" by its appearance of "aus", and it is at the root of the subtle, and the head is large; and in it there are many and small ones; and I saw one who had them in his belly which were more like "funges" than anything else, and they had no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and they were festered, and they corrupted with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and discovered in one there were 18 knots, and in the other 6. The incisions should be made if you observe that the hairs are moist, and the color of the artel is bluish-gray and moist with a subtle root; if the cope is large, and they are present, the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For the barber often has too large dislocations of sinews, and if you do not care, then do cauterize; and if you see the hair coming out and oozing from the incision of fire, then take a piece of thread well made, and in the artel as we have said, and leave it there; and then restrain, and do not stop pulling the thread until it covers the artel, and work by it; and if the roots are large, then pour the cope on the belly at once, but you must not cover too much, then cauterize so that it does not retract; then cure the wound, and keep the healing balm which is of a sickly color and poor sense and lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted ulcers, and I will come to the cure of this chancere after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bowels are full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the bowels comes from a cauterization or a cut of the skin or face, and it is under the belly and in some of the feces, if it happens in other ways, or of sand which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of ventositeit; and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the issue of the bowel, then the color of the ulcer resembles the color of the corse, and it is a light thing with some pain, and open to various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed on both sides, it returns, and by chance it may be strangled, and enlarges the entrance to the bath and requires much labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand; it does not constrain you; and if it is due to sand, then the signs are large and hard, and it is filled according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to ventersity, then it is wet at the tip, and you open it when you look at whether the appearance is of the sand of the artery, or of the vein, or of the ventersity.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it happens that you let the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of incisions and abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or the bowels, then it comes that you command the surgeon to touch his finger, and make it wide all around, then sew it around the entire wound, then order him to squeeze between his hands, then go to the part of the wound that you have signed with all your fingers, then make half of the aphortium extend on the inside of the large intestine; then tie it with a strong thread or a cord of fine silk tightly, and make the half of the aphortium extended on the thread, and your index finger indicates, and you can feel the intestine; if you catch the intestine with the thread, if it slips, and cut the intestine at the abdomen; and if you catch the bowels, if it gets to the large intestine, and cut the superfluity; and if the artery or the vein is against, or the wound, then return to your oversight and take two eagles, and two threads of two feet long, and cut two points on the eagles, and cut the two threads as you think that you will see; then stretch the aphortium on the four points of the eagles, and if you see, then the eagles, and leave the wound as it bleeds, and let the dead part die by itself; or if it is bleeding subtly and oozes, then do the cure for what it comes, and close the aphortium as we have said; and remove the sac or the moisture that you touch, then cure the wound of what it covers, and soothe the wound.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division that the appearances of syphilis resemble chancre, and we comment that one must over it with medicines, and we comment that the cure of iron is necessary; and we say that syphilis enjoys the marriage, and great caution in its cure, and they tell the ancient that when syphilis is in the body or can be treated if like chancre which is in the mammillae, and in the groin, and in similar places, and it must be treated completely when it begins; and when it is large and old, if not approached, only one can be cured because I have never seen a cure for it; and no one has ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient should first purify the knife with black oil; then, if it shows signs of fullness, it should be heated in the fire to make the cut; then, the bones or joints should be cleaned with vinegar, and the hair of all parts should be cut, and the nails should be trimmed; the wound should be left to bleed freely, and the blood should be squeezed into a cloth or container, and if the dislocation occurs away from the artery or vein, as cauterization causes it to become inflamed, then another cure should be applied as soon as it is safe.
de ydropisie	The text provided seems to be incomplete or incorrect as it does
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division of the appearances of edema, and in what manner the assembly of the fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if only; and one should not touch with fire in these two appearances; it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore, when you treat the appearance of edema called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you look at the maladies are weak, or if there is another disease than edema, if as all and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch with fire, because it is doubtful; and if you see the malady of strong virtue, and it has no other disease than edema only, and it is not too little nor too much, then you should over: gently press the malady with your hands, and the ministers press the belly to the lowest part of the piss, then take the spatumile espinous according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so, let us proceed with the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And so, let us proceed with the second part. If it enters not farther than the intestine when you feel it, and it cannot be cut; then look if the protrusion is towards the intestines: if it comes that you cut it from the abscess III, you must do it directly above the point of entry; and if it is due to liver disease, then your incision at III must be; and if it is due to the mucus, then it must be on the left, and not only the patient's pain but also the superfluity does not reach the weak one; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and the abscess, and lightly touch all the surrounding tissue between the skin and the sutures as you would when cleaning a nail or an ingrown toenail; then perforate the suture until the surrounding tissue comes to the skin six times, and that is the end of the abscess, then pull out the instrument, and it will be in the form of:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver snake, and is of rain or light arrow, and in the part of the small puncture; and sometimes costs three punctures, and twice on another part, and once on another; and the head is cut so like a pen, and that is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head of the wound is the sharp point, and when they thrust it in, it now goes in; empty the wound as much as possible, for if you see more than it can hold at that time, either the malady has resolved its spirit from the weapon, or the hand has grown weak, or it is approaching death; but according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of his virtue signify, and his wounds; then withdraw the instrument and hold the wound, and it will be held now by the heat that stops the puncture which was made in the suet, according to what I have spoken, that you perceive this way; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the malady suffering thus, and draw out a little quantity; do this every day, and keep it from bleeding as much as possible, but only a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	When you doubt the patient's condition and allow them to be thirsty, if the cure of the grave or sand bath is needed, and by drinking or bathing and in the sun, and becomes flushed; and the cure of dry medicines as soon as they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the boil, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the hair's growth
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without having some hair in their beard, or if the beard is small, or it is not full in their face.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the patient does not see it at all, even the slightest detail according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the catheter subtly, and tie it with thread, and the patient should be able to urinate within 3 or 4 days, if the catheter is closed, and urinate, and then reinsert; and by chance, if it does not close, because the urine that comes out is not enough to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the catheter is small, if it is treated with a tight bandage as we have said, if it does not enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have a catheter in their leg are better, because no child is born with a catheter at the top of the thigh, because they cannot urinate before they free their thigh; and they cannot enlarge because the material cannot come out just yet, and it is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The manner of the operation is that if the patient feels pain on his back, it is the head of the screw and the loop as big as a pen's point, if it pierces through the skin, if it can; and keep away from dislocation of blood that often comes, and if it comes, if the wound of that which wounds is cured as soon as it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	of the bumps of the screw
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times they come out of the bumps in the screw, and it is an unpleasant appearance; and among them are malignant and non-malignant; if it comes that you burn them with the subtle one on the cotton, and cut and clean all, then put on soft cotton with Egyptian ointment; then the cure of ointment is done as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the abscess is malignant, with a putrid smell and discharge, then you must use cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	After treating the abscess, and if it is still growing, and has both dead and living tissue, then you must remove the entire abscess. And if it grows again, if the cure is effective.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you treat the head of the dislocation as a whole, and do not notice the pain in the shoulder, and there is blackness and corruption in the joint and around it; then all that is black and corrupt must be removed, and then apply honey and flour made from the crushed meat of pigs and vegetables, and then other cures as needed until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out, then follow this form of the moon cauterization:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	If the cauterization helps with these two conditions: to stop the flow of blood and prevent infection; and if the head of the thorn is corroded and retracts, then you must either cut or pull out a cord from the thorn, and pierce the wound with a needle, and let blood drain from the head of the thorn to those who have not been circumcised, or have had an incision or abscess, if it comes to this that you scrape the thorn from the skin as far as the roots are loose, and free the head of the thorn from the skin of all parts; and if this is a difficult thing to do, then scrape the thorn from the skin of the thorn and its tip, and then moisten the element between them, and wrap it with a fine thread of wool soaked in cold water, so it does not re-enter.
de la circoncision	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a major wound if it is treated like the others; however, when we perform this work of our will, and in fact as for our children, it is the best work that we can do, and the most gentle for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not say that they circumcised their children, because they do not use it in their law, and have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I want the largest part of the masters and doctors who made circumcision on the day of birth, and with force, and at all ages; if it were not for the child's pain, and by chance if they cut off too much, and moreover if they cut off the wrong part.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they recover, and the pain is double, and at circumcision which is not sure the point of the member; and at circumcision of the umbilicus by chance escapes the iron, and cuts the umbilical cord, and often do not have a circumcision and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	The first sentence to translate is: "De la mondification qui est faite en forces, as je trouvé l'expérience de la bonté, car les forces cortent juste comme bien et mal.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if it fits well in I, all the strength is in your thumb; but the thread must be well tightened around the leather; and it should be the first time of cutting that you think the child understands, that you only lay the thread along the verge so much, and then pull it in all the ways that you can; then place it straight between your hands, and pinch the forces between your hands or with your fingers that the children do not see, and no of the strings; then put your hand on the verge and blow or keep your breath, and hold it as high as the head of the verge is; then clean well of the dirt that it is assembled, then tie the leg of a double thread, then tie it to the other lien; and hold it with the second reading in the pouch and the index finger, and pinch between the two strings, then gently lower the curved head and draw the chief of the verge; then leave the sanc poc and poc, for it is the madness; and put powder on and on the powder I draped with a moieuf of cooked kid cut with rose wine confit with olive oil and fresh, and let it sus jusc'a the other day, and the cure of another cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The force of the mandible is formed in this way: the two jaws should be even and aligned, and the jaws should be as large as the fingers equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mastication is when the teeth escape through the incision; therefore, it is necessary to stretch the tooth to your nail, unless the gum has abscessed; and it should be done properly, and if you do not hold it with your nail, then the tooth.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three years, and what is out of the way is deformed, if you let it be as long as the gum has abscessed, and the wound is soothed, and lightly burned; if the tooth is like you hold, and keep from the part of the gum, it will not hurt you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Cure the joint with something that is sour-smelling wound powder, which we have said or treated as powders, and if it does not work, it will do no good; cure the joint as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	2. Retain urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	3. If the urine is profuse, or due to cystitis, pyelonephritis, bowel obstruction, or gallbladder colic, and if the urine is misdirected as we have said in the division; and if the urine is urgent, and you see that the retention is by the urethra at the junction of the bladder, then it should be held with the pincers on the genitals; and the patient should lie on his back, and extend the abdomen from the part below the loins, and restrain the malaides so they do not stretch too much as they can; and then the urethra of the bladder should be constrained at the expression of the urethral opening, because if the urine is urgent, and the malaides feel great pain, then it should be administered extraction to all the instrument called "siringue," of which the form is: and it should be a thin silver thread, as fine as the tail of a swallow; and it should be the cord of a palm leaf about half a meter long, and it should be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Here comes the translation:
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there is dysentery or abscess in the bladder, or when purulence is present, and you see water and medicines distilling, then do this to all the instrument called "cleped" (or "purgation"), and it looks like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there is third degree: two parts on one side, and one part on the other, as you see; and the water is consumed by the medicine that is so hot that it burns the urethra well, if you can draw out the moisture, and insert it when you have finished; and when you see your medicines running in the bladder, put the end of the clyster in the moisture, and pour it into the syringe which is ready; if you draw up the moisture into the clyster, and then forcefully push down the syringe, if the moisture goes in, and comes out now to the bladder, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster that is used to cleanse the bladder: if this is the case:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or archers, and the head is higher; and then to the eye or the ligaments; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see clistering the bladder, then place it between the two eyes forming a double-layered pouch, and heat the moisture on the fire; then cut the chief down the middle, then hold your hand on the bladder all the way through the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make the circle, and perk it roundly around; then pull the strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one does an arrow, and put what you see as oil and moisture and glue in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand as much as the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	Of the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in division the ways of incision, and the extraction of arrows; and we said the difference between the incision enjambree as rains, and those signs, and in which pike one must over for size; and in the vessel, and in the verge; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision which is more frequent in the bladder in children, and it is a sign that the child's water has jumped from the bladder, resembling its subtlety; and it is open harene, and greets his mother's girdle, and he can many times, and then becomes large; and at the end of these jumps, the children's waters are reduced to IIV years, and it is a grief in viellars, and it is as jones moiene, in those who are between jonesce and viellece; and it is the cure more light in those who have large pike, than in those who have small.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if we cover the patient first with a cloth, we must clean all the feces that are inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hurts to press on the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the waist, stand up and move down until the wound reaches the top of the bladder, and never feel any pain in the upper part; then place it between your hands, with your hands on the lower parts of the thighs, if the bladder is completely deflated; then press and touch the wound; if you feel the wound in the vicinity, it is now time to cut along the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If she does not feel any pain, if your index finger shows signs of oil from the left hand, or if it is swollen, or if the wound is infected; then the bone in its foundation, and try to pull it out, and when you feel with your finger at the base of the vagina; then press on your finger, and pull out the bone as much as you can see cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the vagina with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand, and his left hand to pull up the curls at the top, and his left hand to pull down the curls in the part where the tail is made; then he cuts the pubic hair with a blade, according to the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	1. And they go between the bones and the foundation, not in the cost of the opposite side; and there should be three on either side of the incision, and the head should be either at the foundation or the incision, and the tail should be wide enough so that it is large by default, and becomes narrower, according to the size of the incision, not too large; by chance, the pressure if it is at the foundation, that it jumps further due to work; and they check if there is a part pieced or angles, and margins: if they are rough to come out; and if a part is connected, it resembles a glance, and curves, whose end is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For the head, if it has angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not slip, then you must pull on the nails that are like a wedge at the top, to hold the piercing so it does not slip; or you may use a subtle instrument under the chin; and if you do not manage to pull it out, then enlarge the hole in the chest, and if it is not broken, then use gypsum to stretch it, and if there are more piercings, then pull out the largest one at the top of the vagina, then cut it, and the rest after that.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is left large, it will become even larger, causing a great wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two possibilities for the patient: either they die, or urine comes out through the urethra because the urine cannot be held; but you should try to draw it out, or cut it with nails, as much as you can until you have completed your task; and when you have finished your work, use frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood ointment, and pull it out, and put on moistened cloths in oil and wine, or in rosewater and cold water to soothe the wound; then tie up the patient at the neck, and do not let the string slip from the knot.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you dislocate the shoulder, if it is well oiled with oil and vinegar, then apply the first aid remedy of ointment of balsam and basic ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if the abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the vein, and this is retained in the urine, which is done in part in such a way that without jumping with the urine: then take your hand in the wound, and extract the pus, because if it remains, it will cause the vein to rupture and bleed; then cleanse the wound with vinegar and iodine and salt, and help in all ways that you know, until it is healthy; and make sure that all the remedies you apply, you tie the thighs together, and assemble the medicines under the arm.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the prick is small, and it is led by the vein, and it is not cut, and the urine cannot be discharged; if the cure of this that I say is otherwise, you should cut it many times, it is an excuse for the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already used this method before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will prepare it according to this form and make it at a 30-degree angle, with one ton.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the vein opposite the prick, so that it does not get caught in the uterus; then pull the thread gently through the vein until it reaches the prick; and turn the thread in your hand over the prick as much as you can, until you can feel the prick on the other side; if urine comes out, then press your hand on the part of the vein that is exposed to the uterus.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the fracture is too great, and it breaks with urine, and the girdle of the patient tightens; and if you do not know how to do this for anything, then cut off the end of the wound and the other side, then make a groove between the two bones, then pull out the part that is inside, remove the ligature, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's wound
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	If there is only one wound in women, and if there are no other times, then the cure is difficult for three things: the first is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that it is not possible to find a well-known woman who has descended as mires, even when she is cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	1. If a third method is found that by chance there is a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth method if it is that the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it is easier to make a more perfect size, and greater pain it has. And if one must be removed from this, then it comes that you prescribe a wise remedy for the women's life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command in the inquisition of the wound; and look well if the woman is virgin: therefore it comes that she must fulfill her duty or foundation and seek the wound; and if she is true, if she is constrained by her duty, and the midwife recommends that she fulfills her duty or with the midwife, and who wants to press her left hand on the bladder forms.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the wound is deep, that it moves little by little from the entrance of the vagina up to the root of the thigh; then, cover the wound at the root of the thigh in the cold part of the thigh, wherever it is most sensitive, and feel the wound in that part; and do not move the hand away from the wound or the entrance, and make it as small as possible at first, then bite on it, if you feel the wound so sharp that the cut is bleeding, and squeeze it as many times as the wound can bleed, and know that there are many kinds of wounds: it is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and curved, and those that have rains.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you suspect any deformities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it is not bleeding, then put vitrol on the wound and hold it for an hour until the wound is no longer bleeding; then return to your work, as long as the wound is firm, and have estrumens as I mentioned in the extraction of the wound to help you in your work. And if it is not bleeding, and it is a vein that is blocked, then put powder on the wound and press it with tent cloths and bandages, and do not continue this, and leave the wound and do not touch it by chance, as a result, the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is calmed, and you look at it, if it returns to your care, as long as the pierce is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	1. The ramices aquose are nothing more than an assembly of moisture or white soap, which is removed from the hair roots, which contains the epididymis; and is called "soap"; and it has never been properly in the fabric of the epididymis, if one takes care that it is another organ; and this is the skin between the white soap that we have said; and they have not been seen without.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	2. And the generation of this ramice is from fibulature that comes to the hair roots, and it is expanded by that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	3. And never has it come from percussion on the hair roots, and this moisture is of many colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or without redness, or black, or white, and it comes more; and these are the signs to conclude this assembly, for if it is white soap that we have said, then it is the epididymis that is reset, it is not long as it appears to be an organ, and it does not open the hair roots, for it has moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If the patient has moisture in the same cloth, and the wound is sewn with a part of the thigh, and it is thought to be from other tools; and if the moisture is between the hide of the horse and the white sackcloth, then it feels well. Therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, you should apply it to all the introducers at once.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, based on what comes after the introducer, judge whether it is dense or not.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cut with iron, if it comes that the flesh is sound according to what we could do and the filling of his chest; then he lies on his back, on something high, and puts his hands under the cloth; then he does the same to his left side, and commands the minister to do it to the right, and extends the grip on one of the two thigh bones of the horse; then take the scalpel, and cut the hide of the horse between the two thigh bones as far as the knee; then cut the flesh of the thigh perpendicularly to the white sackcloth, and scrape it subtly so as not to hurt it; then pierce the white sackcloth at the large wound, and take out all the blood, and then put your thumbs, and close the wound; and do not touch the thigh, but only the sackcloth itself, cut it subtly on both sides, if you do not cut it well, then the wound will come back; and if the leg jumps away from your hand, when you have completed the wound with white sackcloth, then assemble the two thighs of the horse in one seam, and cure them as you would with other wounds, as long as they are sound.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you suspect the testicle is affected by another disease, and if you doubt that it will dislodge from its suspension, then cut all the suspensory ligaments, and remove the testicle, and treat it as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is assembled into two parts, as branches; then cut the other part in the same manner as the first; then cleanse the sanc with a cloth, and put on oily linseed oil; and put on another soft thread in wine and oil, and tie it around the suspensory ligaments, and double knot the drapery, and tie it to all the parts that are according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two threads, and use fine linen according to this appearance and they should be gathered by stitching in the gore of the breeches, and some of the points pregnant at the back, and others at the part where the poignil is; and the other two chiefs on the two angles, and so all gathered in the braver's loop; and never has this fire cautery been used on the sharp point of iron, and it is that you prick the subtle cultellaire cautery, and cut the leather of the thighs, and so smooth it if as we have said, if that white part which contains the ague is discovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and perceive the white of the ague in the teeth, and scorch it at this subtle cautery chaut.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	The patient should try in all ways possible to raise the limb; let the force not touch the thigh; keep an eye on this work being done safely; and avoid dislocation of the bone, and deformity of the limb, and nothing else makes it worse, whether it is an amputation or a deformity of the bone or anything else, if you cure what makes it worse, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is not strong enough and does not want to endure this treatment for its horrible nature, if it causes perforation, as I have said, and if you are sure about the meanings we have said that the mouth is the place, then fix the mouth on the highest point; then perceive the aperture in the part most distant from all the surrounding tissue, and make the perforation long and wide; and let the wounds be large if they all open quickly; then put cotton on the lip, and tie it, and leave the discharge of the wound to flow out, and cure as long as the wound is healing; and if the bladder swells and does not allow the discharge to pass through the wound's mouth, then use a needle or instrument that is used to treat the discharge of pus from abscesses, and enlarge the wound, and keep an eye on the discharge, and assemble the wound after six months or sooner, and when it is assembled, as before, and pass through the mouth's jaws.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the thighs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Sutures that in the cutting of this ramus cause pain in many cases, and I think it is better to leave them; and I will tell you the procedure and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that all abscesses come from wounds and also from arrows; and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know that the abscess is caused by superfluous acrid and sharp matter, which is expanded in the wound or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the wound; and there is no pain, and it is a grievous abscess, and sometimes it is grayish-green and purplish, and without any blood from an artery or vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is of an artery, if it is cut by the disposition of an abscess, when you press on it with your two hands; and only then can you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is made of gut is cut by its disposition at the expression of touching with two hands, and can well make the shape as this appearance, and as the others; and it is that you cope lou keur des coions, then it is the head in the top, and the tail is white fac, and deliver lou suspensoire of all parts of the head.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the head is already swollen with these caps, then it comes that you must turn the head and lou copes; and if it is in white fac, or in case which is dedens the vasselz, then it comes that you deliver all this tenve, and lou cope reondement.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is from below, and it is stuck, and you have to pull it all out, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are complete, if you apply the smooth linen oil and rose oil, and then the cure of other cures as soon as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the teeth
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a boil enveloped in a envelope resembling the banana, with the softening of the teeth, and the patient suffers greatly when it occurs; and the treatment of this disease is well presumed to be as good as this one before us, and all will tell you the wound of the patient, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on his side, then lift up the arm with the elbow at your side, and tighten the muscles of the forearm as much as possible, and extend them; then cut through the skin and flesh as wide as possible along the vein, until it is discovered, and then scrape it from each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then tie a thread or double cord, and lay it at the first place where the blood came out, and tie it to the other end; then cut through the skin and flesh in a straight line, according to the length of the wound, and cut off the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as we have treated others, if no vein is found that bleeds, and all the veins come out, if it comes to cutting the veins at all the veins; if the patient loses his consciousness through the incision of the veins, and becomes cold and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	The first sentence to translate is "de la routure dou syfac". The translation
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The translation of "de la routure dou syfac" is "of the dislocation of the shoulder".
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The translation of "Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac" is "And the signs are when it is a section of the shoulder".
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time does the gut descend with the intestines, and it is held in place, and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of fire for pain, it cannot be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	In these treatments of fire for pain, it cannot be avoided. If you command the patient to put their intestines back in, and they resist, then force them. Then open the wound as wide as possible, and cleanse it with hot water. Then take a needle or make one from four threads, and sew the ends of the intestines in the rear part of the wound, which is after the cicatrix of the coils. Then sew the knots of the intestines, as many as there are filzs, and then assemble them one by one in a cross shape, and enclose them with the same serum that was used to cover the cicatrix of the coils, for a strong line of two pars. Then tie the knots of the intestines, and form them into knots, so that no vessels that are cut can enter the wound, and the stitch does not bleed. Then leave the first knot long, and after that leave the serum that covers the cicatrix of the coils long; then cover the part that is covered by the serum with fine hair, and put on plasters, and if it does not heal, do so again. Then take olive oil and apply it to the wound, and put on plasters, and if it does not heal, do so again.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never has this been cauterized on the white beard that we have mentioned, after the incision, due to fear of hemorrhage of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the line until it is dry for him; and if he delays in the wound, then he should raise it with hot water, and follow what we have said, until it is completely healed; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made in the same way as the vis which is assembled like the veins, in a manner that you tie the arteries, after slightly cutting them at the oozing; then cover it with milk, and cure the abscess of that which pains, until the veins cease to bleed; and the cure as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No time comes to burst the angry wounds, as we have said, and open it; and no strings come out of the intestines, and if they do, it's nothing, and repair all hours; and if it does not heal too much in this point, if it thinks it is a wound or a fissure, as the intestine comes out; and this is by the extension of the gut that is angry, as we have said, because it is stretched, then it is stretched, then made soft and bent the limbs and opened; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and no time is cured in this way: and it is that the patient feels pain on his back between his hands, then cut the limb of the wound enlarged according to the amount of III doses; and then take the gut that is loose from the skin that follows, then put the gut on the limb appearing large gut as the patient's belly, then press on the two bellies of the gut, then cut the two apparitions of the gut as the patient's belly, and cut the one and the other; then take the patient's belly, and does not cut the gut or extend the bladder or any other thing, as we have told you in the cure of the wounds of the intestines; then the cure by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the threads, if the wound is cleansed and healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is tight, and there is no appearance of the fracture, and the cauterization is painful in this area, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the hide of the hooves.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the hide of the hooves is softened, because the cuts are softened, and it can be seen; and it is a craft, when one sees that the patient is healing, one must shave the hair of the cauterization on his back, and he cuts the softened leather on the natural leather; then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, first the excess of the softened leather is at three stitches or four firmly; then cut between the stitches, and it cures as well as the other wounds, until it is healthy, and cuts the thread.
dou chastrement	The first sentence to translate is "dou chast
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The first sentence to translate is "Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi," which means "As for the chastisement, it has been forbidden in our law." The second sentence is "et il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:" which means "and I thought it would be best not to mention this in this book; and there are two ways:". The third sentence is "dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;" which means "one of which is that the patient should answer in their own voice when asked, and in their own care:". The fourth sentence is "et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes pour nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes." which means "and the other, because we often help certain animals with chastisement, such as goats and sheep, and rabbits and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastrements are made in two ways: either by attraction, or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one we make by attraction, we make our seat as best as possible in hot water, until the coil is softened and molten; then draw them out with your hand, as soon as they are put back and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the size of the chastrement, you must heat the best, and press the leather of the coils with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each oef at each cop, when they are well burned; and leave no small scar or subtle scar that is on the veins; and this manner of chastrement is worse than that made by attraction, because in attraction nothing happens to the coils, but the best desires luxury; then cure the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	1. The first sentence does not contain any words in Old French.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	1. "Hermofrodites" is not a term used in this context. It seems to be a typo or a misunderstanding. The sentence seems to be discussing the different ways in which humans can be classified, with one way being when there are two openings, similar to a female's, and no hair, and never passing urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	1. The sentence seems to be discussing another way in which humans can be classified, specifically in women. It mentions that they have lou (hair) on their fingers, similar to a virgin, and the openings are located in the same place as in males.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	1. The sentence seems to be discussing the treatment of the stomach and mouth. It mentions that if all the dry chips are removed, and the wound is treated like other wounds, then in the second way, men whose urine escapes through the hairy openings do not require treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tenting is a tool used on the natural part, as it is too unsightly to see; and no woman has it as great as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you trim the superfluity of temptation with your hand or nails, and lightly; and do not cut too much, so as not to cause pain, then the cure of another remedy as it should be healthy; and on another tool that is in the mouth of the patient, the emphasis, and by chance it may jump, and it is called the appearance of a kow, and therefore it was called the ancient "kow's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it comes to your mind that you should copy this, as we have said, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is of the nature of the woman is not clear, or the purse is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that came; or it is due to a child's age, or secret facial expression, and is made in front of the marrriage, or costume, or dress, or otherwise; and the conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers have; and the knowledge of this if it is by the care of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the dislocation is felt immediately, either by you or by another person.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the pain is subtle and occurs suddenly, and you think it might be a dislocation, then quickly check: gather your index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then, form the fingers as much as possible, until the subtle pain disappears and the dislocation is reduced; then, put your hands on the thighs and gently push them towards each other, so that they do not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is severe and rapid, then it may be necessary to use force; in this case, it is recommended to hold the limb in place with your hand, as if it were a piece of charcoal.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient is cold, and the pulse and breath are weak; and if you give him medicines to heat the blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and a large amount of urine; then apply a poultice of hot ointment to the wound, so that the wound may heal; and keep it there for a long time, and then give him a linen sheet to lie on, and cure him with other remedies as he becomes healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	2. And when the woman comes in labor, if it is necessary to cut according to this method, do not use enchanted hooks.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	3. For the enchanted hook in the woman's womb, it should not be touched with force.
des emorroides	The first sentence to translate is "des emorroides
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes are overgrown veins that do not become clogged by custom, and when they become old they turn into theeluls; and we have said in the division of the appearances and signs, and I will say those that receive care.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that emorroydes and theeluls, when they are formed in the marriage, do not appear by touching, if it is not by the care of iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the marriage can be felt, and they can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	1. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then remove the nails from the horse, and cut off its roots, then dust with medicines restricting blood loss, such as ice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then put them in a cool bath; and if she loses consciousness, if it is made in a decoction of sumac and the juice of grapevines and galls and similar things, and then take flour of oats, mix with honey and hazelnut, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it pains, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it does not relieve, make the patient sit with their back against a wall and apply pressure; then take, and the milk in juice of plantain or willow bark with wine vinegar, and apply to the shoulder.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is healed, if you cure the shoulder with ointment until it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles very sharp spices, as I said in the text; then you cure it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of the patient's abscesses
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come in the patient, such as chancre and puerperal aposteme, herpes, estiomenes, fistules, emorroides, aposteme chaut, and others that I have mentioned earlier.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, in this treatment, it is necessary to treat the aposteme chaut that comes in the patient, which is not the same as other abscesses; and if you see the wound, look to see if the aposteme is red at the beginning of its appearance, and whether there is chalor and fievre, and if it becomes red, you should see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	1. Therefore, do not hurry to remove the splint, but make him endure as long as the pain is soothed; and then place the patient on his side, with two pillows under his head, and support his back and assemble his limbs in their proper position; and let his thighs be expanded, and put his knees against his chest, and tie them well with a belt; then move the instrument towards the left side, and after that comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see him using this instrument, you fix the rite first to know the proportion of the marrow, so that what comes from the instrument does not exceed what it should, and does not cause the patient pain; and if it is larger, then it is necessary to cover the proportion of the marrow with cloths, so that the patient is not grieved; and it is necessary that he places the end of the instrument at the root, and marks the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	1. When the wound is open and it is touched with the hand, if it sticks to the head, apply warm ointment to the swelling; and when the bow is visible, if it is necessary to put in the wound soft tents in oil rose or orange-scented oil; then place the tent for the wound at the end of the marrow, and place it on the marrow and the clean, soft, warm, or cool pimple that has been cooked; then the cure after two days of dressing, as long as it is healthy; and never lift the marrow and the wound by a cloth of warmth and honey, and then with warmth or the roots of lilies and aristocratic plants are cooked; then repeat the dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the marriage, then it comes that you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mastery is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman press against the bed, and desire to smell the aroma: therefore, haste the children to be born; and you should know that these children are according to the figure natural, and are from his own offspring, and the second one with him; and when you see these signs, it comes to gently press his belly, if he gives birth quickly; for when he descends from his head, if he is with his second one, and is monied by good cleanliness, and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it has never come upon its own parts, and comes to the heart or shoulder, and the hands, or to the belly or stomach, and is converted by chance in his neck, and through other malicious figures; if it is skilled at the dance that it is wise and subtle in these things, and warns against error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures to help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes to its father naturally, and the woman gives birth painfully, and his virtues are weak, if he is placed on a stool or the women hold him; and if his nature is olive oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then dance between his two little spatula, which is this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	1. And take the second part, and hold it against his finger as much as the moisture that is in it; and then press the belly of the woman as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to close the woman's muscles with ointment of fenugreek; then apply and suture and tie the mouth and nose for an hour: if now the child comes out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	2. And if the hands come out first, then it is necessary to gently open the wound a little at a time; and if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the bed, and lift the feet up; then lower the bed on the ground, and examine the woman to see if she does not bleed standing; and if the hands cannot be inserted, and the child is dead, then it is necessary to cut the fingers at the point that is in front of it, and take out the child, and reset it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the child's foot issue
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes to his feet, if it is necessary to put on shoes; and then they are tied tightly; and then the legs are pulled and stretched as much as possible; and then the shoes are put on.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump high, if commanded, and made to run faster; if it jumps, let God help it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump, as we have said, if the shoes are tied tightly, as much as possible, according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	1. And if it does not come out as we have described, say it is very difficult, and use olive oil, wax, and melted gum, and apply it to the woman's private parts; then place it in hot tea until it reaches the ribs; when it is moistened, apply a cord of iron, and remove it, and leave it for an hour; then place it on the seat, then draw it out and constrict the mouth and nose, and press on the stomach lightly, as the child now leaps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	2. of the issue of the child from its groins.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the infants come in this form, if they put their hands on their chests occasionally; then it is hung from their neck, and hangs by their feet, and is wrapped in a cloth; and they fold their hands on their stomachs, and press them on the thighs as much as possible, until the belly is flat against the ground; and if the infants do not jump, then they take hold of their legs and bend them, then they bend their stomach towards their feet, and they pull their hands towards them; and the child is also folded; and command the woman to pray as much as possible until the infant is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary for the engineer to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then I raise the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then I make her sit on the bed, and form the legs; then relax the muscles that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then I make her sit on the seat, and study to bring back the hand; and when the child is in its natural position, and it is pulled out, and it commands that it presses as much as the child can.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child at its neck, and has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	1. It is necessary that the patient's hand marks it, then twists it slightly and lightly; when it is even, if it is placed in the nature of musk and oil, as we have said, then it is commanded to move slightly and lightly; when this is done, if it is held firmly in its place, and it is commanded to press; and the holding is firm.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. In the same manner for all the second-degree burns.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	3. When it comes to this method for all second-degree burns, if the patient covers the affected area with their hand, as long as the moisture is present; and if the child can reach his face and neck, and if the blister bursts, it should not be held, and the child will die; then burst the blister, as soon as you have done so, and command the woman to press no time: therefore, it should be done lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is said that twins are born many times, and never at the third or fourth birth; and this is a strange thing, and not often seen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are strange, and do not live long, I know what it is, that they are multiplied, and are born by the force which decides them, which is like the bud; and never issue naturally as all come at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born with difficulty, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and done at once and lightly what it does; and done as it should be greeted.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No times are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all formed as a child by the measurement of the young girl's growing beauty, and cover that the dance is everything, because by chance it resembles something like this; if you follow what comes.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to cut with your hands; if it comes that the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no accident or dies; if it comes that the woman is in her right mind on her back, and her head is not bent, and her legs raised; and the midwife applies the teign de II parts, or she is laid in bed if she is not treated in the descent of the child; then anoint the mouth of the mother with olive oil moistened with mustard and fenugreek and lin seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and mustard; then breathe on the mother's hands lightly, then take I leu or the bones that are removable from this, and take care that the bones are not placed in the child's mouth, or in its cheek, or in its beard, or in its hair, or in its ears, or in its eyes; and if the bone is placed in her left hand, she should hold it with her right hand, and put the sponge between her two fingers of the right hand, and breathe on it lightly with all her hands, and place the bone in no of these places that we have said, as long as it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find the other bone, or the one you are most familiar with, if the extraction is equal; and then the dislocation is correctly moved from side to side, by moving slightly in both directions, and the teeth of the bone should be held tightly, as shown in this example:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If a part breaks off, and some of its two sides are missing, and the other side is taken care of in that part; and if it does not break off, then set this bone or higher up on the limb, and do this until all parts are fixed.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by traction, then wrap around as shown in this example, until it is entirely tight; then the bandage should be tied at the ankle joint or the knee, and you should do the same with the other hand, and tie the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	When the head of the child is large and misshapen, or has a swelling assembled, if it comes that you pull out the spatula sharp between your two hands, and make the swelling and draw the spatula; or you cut it with the instrument called "almidach", if the swelling comes with the stools or chapiter that follows after this; and then make the child's head naturally large; and then pull out the bones with pincers, and the child's head jumps and is drawn to the force of it, as long as the moisture which is or has come out; and if it cannot come out, if you cut it by pieces at the belly that you press; and if it is swollen in the belly or side, if it comes that you pull it out as much as the moisture allows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is among its teeth, if it is the light attraction, and the swelling is light in the mouth of the nurse.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or in the throat, then cover it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and when the belly or throat is cut, as much moisture as possible should be removed; and if another bone is broken, and the head is swollen, then the nurse should bite her hand and pull out the child's mouth; then she should take the gums or both, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the nurse is retreating due to inflammation that came, then there should be no trouble, only moist things and soft things should be administered; the administration should be done with a plaster, and it should be moistened and made wet.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the child is born on its cost, and you place it equally, then it will be as we have said in the living child; and if it cannot, then the part that comes first should be left alone, and nothing of the second part should be left.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	If you have done this, then it will be as we have said in the cases of abortions that come before labor; and if they come after, then it should be done with care, restricting the amount of saline, and other treatments will be affected.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I see a woman who is pregnant and had lost her children, then consulted another and was found to be dead by the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came some abscesses in the flesh, and inflamed as soon as they were pricked, and began to grow greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought it long, and could not open the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong attraction, and in it were some bones, and after a few more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised much, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought that it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted the wound, and with hands I touched the bones as much as the woman was better; and she saw the woman long time in pain, and it was a little out of the way of the leg; and I do not remember this chapter because when the master did an strange thing, I thought I should help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the shoulder back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, where we close the books; and when it turns around, it returns to the shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the horn should be more subtle and restrictive, and made of an even or flat surface, or of wood; and the mouth should be no wider than a dozen of this same horn, and the margin of the branches a palm and a half, and on either side as long as a palm or more; and these two ends are bitten in the mouth of the shoulder to open when we turn the horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	1. Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of flat or square wood; it has two handles, as you see, resembling palm branches, and are wide; when you open the marriage bed, if you place the woman on her back, the thighs and legs, then bring the anchors and adjust them together in the marriage bed, and hold the handle of the instrument between your fingers; then operate with all the instrument as you did with the tenails accurately, according to the amount that opens the mouth of the marriage bed, until it is tight.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	1. This instrument is all around, and its appearances are multiplied; and when you see them, the more you work, the higher the price for them in quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	2. If you do not despise the instrument because you have not seen it, for its necessity is not easy to understand.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	3. When the second child is held in the womb, if you command the midwife to let go of the hair, and then pull it out, and make your hands go to the mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of this, well and good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If the child does not cry, and I can, I will suckle or give a drink, and I will put herbs that may open the mouth of the child's mouth, such as mint, rue, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centaury; all these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or can be boiled over fire; then I will take a cup or give a drink if possible, and the other end in the child's mouth, and I will lick it until the vapors come out of the child's mouth; then I will suckle it, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second part is completed.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	When she remains after this treatment, and if it does not improve, then order the patient to massage their left hand with oil of sesamum or mustard seed oil, and then apply it to the affected area, and repeat as needed; when she finds it, press and stretch it slightly, so that the joint does not slip during extraction. However, it is necessary to move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes and becomes red.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the joint is squeezed, we have said that the treatment is to stretch and fumigation of herbs; and if it does not do all that we have said, then keep from pulling; but it may be that what is in the mouth of the joint, you tie it to the woman's breast, then cleanse it with four-drug ointment; if it comes back and returns, and it becomes stronger; but always, when it comes out, if it gives off a bad smell in the stomach and head, and stains the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it comes to that, then simple fumigations are in order: no one of the ancients has proven fumigations of cresson and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is made with it to fumigate the woman with the retention of flowers and the secondine if this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a dog, and one puts the subtle head on nature, and the large heads under the fire; and it is the fumigations with charcoal, and the smoke as much as it is greasy, and another one begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to perceive the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not perceived the foundation, but they have felt a subtle smoke: if it comes to that, to do the ballet that he perceives that smoke at his turn, and does not perceive anything of spatumile agut, and keeps the plaster that it does not touch; then put on the soft one in wine and oil, then the care of the ointment as much as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not remain, if you put or prick a needle in it, and leave it hands free, and it is soon seen when the child looks up in the bedrooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this wound of the soil or abscess; if it comes, if you cure it, if as we have said, the needle.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula with great foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulous, and grow when they come out of the lower part, or in the space between them; and if this nodularity is old, it moves, and becomes moist or subtle, and never are these fistulas permanent; and they are known by the fact that they are caused by egestion or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance some jump.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and almost the entire vagina; and they reach the joint of the cuxe, and the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And if you cannot find the fistula at its base, and it does not have a base: and it is that you cut your index or base with an iron or steel needle in the fistula when it does not have bends.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has bends, then cut a small tent of plonc or horse hair, as you feel the tent or the hair in your hand; and if you do not feel it, and there is no outflow of egestion, wind, or ver, as we have said: be careful that it does not perforate; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the bladder or urethra, and the urine suddenly comes out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived at the joint of the thigh, if it is in the tense limb at the knee; if it is not a tortuosity and the invention of the pain enters, if it is that it is everted below the bowel, and there is no medicine to stop it by rubbing; and in these fistulas there is no cure except labor and vanity of the proud who get involved in them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not a new and old fistula, with hope for health by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient's pain comes between your hands on his back; and he helps his legs until they reach his thighs, and they are inclined to his belly; then bore a hole in the skin, or if it has tortuosity, as long as you watch or the tension comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain at the foundation, and if you reach the end of your index finger, it means that he is trying to hold on; and if you discover or feel between your thumb the scar or the char, then check if it is intact; if not, it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	All kinds of wounds can be healed, but it's rare; and this help is what we do, if it is the subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as said before; and the boute is put all inside the fistula as it comes out from the foundation; and do this twice or three times, as you check that these chars are firm, which look like a feather of oyster; then the cure of thin wounds is made, as they are, then the cure of ointment anointing char and soldering.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in good health, so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If the patient is not in good health, so be it. If he tries to enter, and does not penetrate the fundament, and enters the body and covers it with a thick blanket of char or smoke, you will see the fistula at this point where the covering ends; if the cope begins at the beginning of the fistula, and comes before the tent, and then cauterizes after, as long as it reaches the top of the tent; it will be delivered from the tent, and will hurt; then mold those charred parts that look like a feather’s tip, and there will be none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If you lack it, and cut between you and the wound, whether by fire or medicinal heat.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery, there are two things to know: it is the surety of these burned bones, and the coagulation of blood and the closure of wounds; then the treatment of wounds with boiled or unboiled herbs, as long as the wound bleeds, and it is not in the burned part; then cure the wound of sore gums with dry char, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	If it is restored, it is healthy and will not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes suddenly with great pain, and is moved away from the heart, and the abdomen is swollen or painful, and it should be questioned.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tension, and enter II is the cloth or skin or charred, or it is near to pierce, if not had been that of a bride and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways: or you cauterize as we have said, or you cover it gently, or if you press if it has tents and cure as we have said; and do not let too much forward, that you do not cover the foundation which holds the tension, and take the excretions by the will of the patient; then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it is healthy, or you untangle that covering and the mundance then when it is covered by the foundation, or by needle or another instrument appointed; then make the charred part which is in the wound as you please; then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the part defuers the foundation: if it is still a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas made in this way: and when you reach the end of the fistula, it is either too costly or difficult to remove the skin over it, if you take a tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you cut it in half and remove the tent along the entire fistula as much as it is at the end:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perceived in the margin of the deep furrow, then remove the thread from that fistula as much as you reach the end; and cut off the tip of the thread, and assemble the two ends, and pull them apart, and leave one or two; and keep it tightened until the threads are no longer affected by the skin that is between them, and heal the wound as much as it is sore and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all ways that you can think of, it will not work too much.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not possible to make the closing too tight, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the rough spiny thorn by which the fistula is made is long and trenched; and on the other hand, not, because of this, it does not pierce or it cannot pierce, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the emorys.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Gouttes are of two kinds: either they are like resin at the foundation, and have small and large grains, and are cut towards the center, and have one or more points, and are sharp at the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are sharp have little moisture, and are cut with a little bit of turquoise or a little bit of acid, and have the color of coral; and the cure for those who have made them sharp at the foundation is that you command the midwife to let them run in chambers, as long as the foundations are hard, and appear the points; if you haste, and can hold them with your nails, or take them with your fingers, then cut into their roots; and if they cannot be held by their moisture, then bend them to the limb, or to cloth, or a piece of camomile; and draw them out of your two hands, then cut them, and powder some hot powders that are in the cauterization leau; or you can cauterize them as is said in the cauterization chapter, and cure others as much as they are healthy; and if the foundations cannot issue, then clysterize the midwife with clyster bitter and sharp, and wash what is at the foundation, so that it may issue openly; and if the midwife's mouth is not closed, then cut the midwife's nails, and if the points are sharp at the foundation, then the cure is light; and if you cut the points with your nails or fingers, then cure them as we have said, so that they may be healthy, and may not fear the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If it comes to your mind that you want to cut the seam according to this way: take one thread, thrust it into an awl, and then draw the thread through and make the awl perceive the other part, and turn the two ends of the other two threads around the awl, and if they are wide; and then tighten the thread, then knot it, and draw out the awl, and do the same to all the others, and leave the surplusance of the thread on the sand; then put the foundation with a smooth, oiled or waxed drapement, and put it down, and command the patient to lie down; and then let it be as long as it is tight, and when it is cut, if the cure for ointment and other cures, so that it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The first sentence to translate is "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement." The translation of this line is
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there are squeezing of feces in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the point of a spatula or your nail scratching the wound, which does not allow it to dry out; then treat it as much as possible, until it is soaked as much as it can, and if it cannot be soaked, then the scratching continues more forcefully than before, until it becomes clean, and is burned; then treat it as much as possible.
dou fremit	The first line of the text translates
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	The first line of the text translates to: "A fly is a small insect that should be removed from the body, and it cannot be felt; and no time does the person feel it, and it is felt as if the person is dying of fremit, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than in any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	The second line of the text translates to: "And if you take a pin from a goose feather, or a vulture feather, and place it on the fremit, as long as the purple circle encircles the fremit entirely; then turn your hand over all the pin until you cover the entire fremit and remove it, and pull out the fremit at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that I make this tool of a copper or iron needle according to this form, and it is subtle and translucent:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	If you see that the cauterization does not move, if it is in front or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a circle.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never has a silver or archaut cauterization been made, nor an alloyed or hammered brass one; and never has any of these sharp and large ones, according to which they are used, been made.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those that are used in the treatment of children and the weak and painful ones are sharp.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clitoris is small and large if it is wide, or the belly is shaped like this:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if it has a descent or the belly is likewise shaped, as you see, and the clitoris is perceived; and it has one of the coste's pertus, and the other I; and it is the belly or puts medicines from a beast's vessel or a pouch, and all around each pertus is perceived, and between each pertus I must do a stitch, then bore in these pertus I fasten the thread as tight as possible, then assemble the belly like a swine; and when the medicine is given, if the instrument has a thread before, then castrate; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of urine or something similar, then lightly apply it; then the surgeon should carefully minister to his two hands together, as much as he can, then remove the plaster, and gently lift the patient's legs to the edge, and if the medicine seems to be working, so much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night, it will be more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you have dislocated the hip due to disease of the abdominal muscles, and the medicine is not working, then it may recur when it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	When the swelling or abscess is large or painful, if it is the same as that of a child; and this is the form of the subtle abscess when the skin is pulled:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said the treatment of wounds in the division; and you will say the treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the instrument or means by which they are made, and of how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by cutting with a blade, or lance, or spear, or needle, or similar instruments; or according to the parts of the body, if it is the same as that of the neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, or stomach, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will mention simple wounds on the neck, because the reminder will be in your chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or breaks the bone, and the bone is not broken, if it is due to the griping of the wound or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt the occurrence of hemorrhage: if the head itself becomes healthier, and there is little blood from the wound, and it is healthier on the opposite side; and avoid the surgeon's fullness with wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not become healthier, if the meat is anemic and does not drink wine and does not eat fat, and applies to the wound, if there is a post-incision scar, it is oiled with oil of rose or only wine steeped; and if it does not post-incision scar, if it is applied to the wound, it is fresh at all its sanc, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if it has been moved, if it applies some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	When the wound is large, like that of a spearhead and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be reassembled by stitches, if they can be reassembled by sewing, if I may say so, as belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and can be held, and only by a nail; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hardness of the leather in the leg, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as chicken and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If you have a wound or scar, and it does not reach the bone, and it is covered with skin, and it grows, then treat it; and if arteries are in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, if you want to stop the artery, and if you remove it slowly, if it is held by a thread; and if it does not benefit, if it is cauterized.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that is to put on this powder which is always dry when the hand has touched it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take some incense, a part; sulfur three parts, and live chalz, and the subtle powder, and apply to the wound, and draw it out as much as it adheres to all its sand; and then put it well, and leave it to drip if it does not thicken, for one does not use the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never has it been done with only chalz, when one does not have incense or the sand of dragon, but that the hand has not touched the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is not healing, do the same here immediately; but use this powder instead; but use some digested ointments or flour of wheat made with vinegar and honey, as it grows bowed; then continue the care for other wounds until they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if it is pulled out with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about this later in the bone fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the severe wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes of the collar or it is simple, if there is no difference between it and the severe wound, but if the collar or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, and there is no other remedy than leaving the treatment alone and not restricting anything, as nerves pull back; and nothing should be put on the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and continuation with it is with the brain, which is the colder part of the body; but let the medicine be, if like cold water is washed in gentle dew, and mixed with olive oil, and the wound is washed again in gentle dew, and other parts of the body similarly treated, and moistened.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, and it is full of knots, then the cure as soon as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	The patient's wounds are clean and filled with blood, if the point is lower on the body; and if the artery is cut, and the blood flows from the wound, if it is stopped, and the gauze, and the cauterization is done properly; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the jaw, and the mandible is held in place, as long as the meat does not touch the jaw bone, and then the wound is dressed according to its natural shape; and then the bandage is removed, and some gaps are left, and the treatment of the swelling is continued until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if the patient wishes; and if there are pieces of bone, if they are carefully removed, and those that cannot be removed, if they are left as much as possible to allow the wound to heal and become less inflamed and infected; and if the wound is fresh, if powder is applied on top of the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If it has in the wound bone and if it has an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is of the wound of the arrow or the spear, and the wound is gushing blood, then look at whether the wound is mortal; and if it is not gushing blood, and it is fresh all around the bone, then do not delay in applying powder to the wound at the first hour, nor let it dry, and wrap it with cloth; but if you do not have powder, then apply wet cotton to the wound for soothing the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound three or four or more hours, unless spasms or tremors of the chest occur from the wound; and when you see the bones in proper position, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the wounds and other wounds as necessary; if it cannot be cured, and it causes pain, perform incisions as the patient has made them; according to what is needed.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is an incision or a cut, and it is simple, on the front or back, if the treatment is by the one in front; if it is large, with poultice; if it is small, with powder, and if it pierces the bone and breaks into pieces, if the wound wants to be treated, and if they are not broken, if they are left exposed, if other wounds have been extracted; and other wounds on other parts are judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of "dou derrompement dou ventre" is "great abdominal pain". This phrase is a medical term used to describe a significant amount of pain in the abdomen. The pain can be caused by various factors such as inflammation, infection, or other medical conditions. In the given context, it seems that the text is discussing the treatment and management of such pain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no injury to the intestines, and it is difficult to dress, this is done by one of the two methods: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is twisted due to the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is twisted, you should treat it in this way: soften a sponge or a piece of cloth only with water, or soak it in hot water and let it dry, and pull the intestine as much as it needs to unwind; and never forget to do this while it is still tight, and it will become loose.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the flame departing, if the intestine is rough or sharp and uneven, it is because of this that the entrance is narrow; and if it cannot enter, then a small wound is made with the instrument on the point of the bone, and the excess tissue is cut off; and the first cure is to trim it, that no one should be cut without great necessity or not; and this is the stitches for the wound: if it does not tear through the skin and does not close, and then it looks like this.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	When the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if you reset it according to its natural form in its own place, then you will have done well, because this is the best.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdomen, if you can make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdomen, then he should place his chest and pelvis higher than the parts below, and thus the wound in the one of the two parts should be higher than the other; and it is necessary to manage this in large and dirty wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdomen, if you can make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdomen, then he should place his chest and pelvis higher than the parts below, and thus the wound in the one of the two parts should be higher than the other; and it is necessary to manage this in large and dirty wounds. If the wound is small, and you can make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest, then you should place your hand on the wound and assemble the lips; and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you prick an awl or more, according to the size of the wound, then leave the head of the wound and insert an awl or a strong thread; and perforate the skin with the skin awl, which is the skin of the thigh, as far as you can perforate this part, and assemble the four corners of the skin with the four corners of the thread; then pull the thread through the hole you have made with the first awl, and then assemble the four corners of the skin with the thread you have just used, and continue to do so until all the wound is closed; and the threads should be fine and not too thick, because fine threads penetrate the entire flesh, and too thick ones do not enter well; therefore they should be fine; and do not insert the threads too close to the wound and the skin, so that they do not open the wound when the patient sleeps, and then cover or wrap the threads with cloth or blankets at the points where the threads are inserted, and leave them as long as the wound is open; and this way of stitching with threads is more convenient in small wounds, because it is easier to prick with the second stitch, and it is that you assemble the four corners of the skin and the four corners of the blanket with a fine thread; when you have perforated the four corners of the skin where you started, then pull the thread through the hole you have made with the first awl, and then insert the thread between the four corners of the stitch, in the same way as you did with the threads; and then cover or wrap the threads with cloth or blankets at the points where the threads are inserted, and this stitching sews the wound, and I saw a wound that one had, which was in the belly, and it was of a coat, and it was more than a palm in width, and it had intestines that were more than a palm in width, and it was the wound in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned to the intestine and after it had been 24 hours, it was 15 years old, and the wound was healed, and I cured it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the patient told me that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not cure him with medicines, because there were no medicines in my league, nor in any other place; and I washed the wound twice a day with honey water, and when it was healthy, I stopped.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me the two main methods of sewing: take the needle, and cut off the end of the thread that is closest to the eye; when it has perforated the right way through the whole, if the handle or the tip of the needle is larger than the thread, or if you have cut off the thread too short, then make another piercing from the other part of the denuded part; and the stitches will be seen if you do it like the barber does the beard, and leave once the wax from one side, and take it back again on the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, as Galen describes it, is what everyone does, which naturally brings together the two parts, and applies one end of the thread to the other, in this way: first, make a loop or thread end near by, and then perceive that one, and leave the other thread ends; then turn the loop, and perceive it at the part nearest to the center of the wound, as the other thread ends; then perceive the other part at the center of the wound, using other thread ends on either side; and this is the most common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	1. If the patient hears this speech and no one testifies, it is necessary to sew the belly to the eyes, or tie them together; and it must be done by sewing one eye from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who are crooked; and afterwards, if the rupture is in the belly, it is the belly that is more painful than the other bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	1. The judgment of the wound is if it is similar to the judgment of other wounds: and that if you treat the fresh wound with all its blood, unless it has moved, then you must reinsert the intestine and the gut; then put some powdered charcoal on the wound, and if it has moved, then put any ointment that is present, as long as the wound bows; then close the wound, and make sure it is safe, and watch it; then treat the wound as you would with other wounds, as long as it is healthy; and if you have no medicine, then put some, as soon as it comes out to gush blood, cotton wool, and rub it twice the morning until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other skill in other matters than wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound is not communal as principal members, then it comes that you lightly oil with oil of chalor or rose oil, and put on garments, and squeeze the corners, and loosen the belts; and if there is pain or chill in the belly, and many times it happens, if the clysterize with black wine, and at the same time the chill comes to the intestine; and the perchment penetrates, and sutures that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is unwrapped, and this is due to the tightness of the knots that bind it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the gash jumps out of the wound, and it is wrapped like the intestine while it is fresh; and if it becomes large and turns black, then you must cut the black part that is inside the wound, because it has veins and arteries; then tie the knot around the part where the gash was, and pull the head of the gouge out through the opening as you pull out the extraction until the wound is closed after the gash has been pulled out.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the womb
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured, and the wound is small, if it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were healed or from the belly of a lance; and it was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and the excretion and vomiting came out of it, and in it was the cure according to what I could, and I did not stop refining until it was healthy, and I examined it.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly; but he had none, but he was delayed in better dispositions, and drank and ate; and they said to no one whoever had a small wound in the intestine, that one must dress it in this manner: first make large gauze, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the mouth has overturned the gauze, if you can stretch it with the lips, then close the gauze, and hold it so that it does not slip, then make another friction in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	1. If the end of the bowel is inflamed and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is wrapped around the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the end of this thread of intestine that is filled with feces, then tie it to the end of this fil I fil of lin subtil tort, then pull the thread through the needle, and then sew the intestine, and reset it at the rupture; and this manner of stitching is not worse than according to the way of marriage and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the small intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, then it should be very subtle.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula," and at the same time if they are thin and have a sharp edge.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the belief that it is hard and painful, like the feather of a quail; and never sharp, and sometimes thin, and sometimes thick; and never pointed, and sometimes wide; and never small, and sometimes large; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that all wounds that are not healed, and have no pain, it is only due to one of the eight causes: it is to know, by the small amount of blood or pus; or by malice; or because the pain is too great, and affects the lips, which does not allow the pain to cease; or there are too many wounds; or the matter is impure, and the quality is poor; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow health, and disappears by nature; or there are vessels or bones: and I have shown all these causes and their signs and cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The first sentence to translate is: "Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	1. When fistulas appear in all limbs of the body; for they have fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the small intestine, or the large intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine's sharp point, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if a part of the member that belongs to its own kind comes, and they seem similar.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	2. When fistulas appear in all limbs of the body; for they have fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the small intestine, or the large intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine's sharp point, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if a part of the member that belongs to its own kind comes, and they seem similar.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If bones do not ache or limbs are affected, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered, and it becomes corrupted and blackened, until the corruption is entirely removed, then the treatment of strange things is done as soon as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and the bowel is rent as before, then you must know that you are not able to do this: if it is dislocated and you can reach it while you are in the womb, and all the corruption is removed, then restore the bone; and if it is healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If the corruption is too deep, you know that you will not be able to reach it; if there is no other way but by force of nature; and if it is a small corrupted bone, and you try to pull it out with your fingers, if the instrument is suitable for this, and if there are many bones, do not leave any one behind; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then combine force and moisture, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	When you do not treat the wound at once, if you put on something to stop the bleeding and leave it until the pus has run between the bones, and then if the bones are more easily affected; and if they are large bones like thigh or knee, if you only allow the corruption to spread as much as possible without causing blackening of the skin, then restore the wound; and if a great part of it is corrupted and comes off with the bone, if it is necessary to cover and seal all the corruption, and then cure it as much as possible; and I will tell you about a fistula that came out in her leg, so that you can use this as an example and help in your own practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The text describes the case of a young man who was suffering from pain in his leg for a certain period of time, which was caused by a wound in the chest that would often bleed. The wound became infected and turned into an abscess, causing a fistula to form and a fistula also formed in the abdomen due to the accumulation of matter. He was treated for two years and did not gain any knowledge in the art of hands, only seeing his leg and the medicines used to cure it, as well as the damage caused by the abscess in his chest. His chest became red and he had a yellowish tint to his complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I made a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at the other part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I became very anxious, and entered one of the holes as far as I could until I found a part of the bone, and I discovered it to be rotten and corrupted; I knew that this was the bone that had been corrupted, and I wanted to make sure there was no more corruption, so I began to restore the wound with medicines long pins, and could not suture; then I came out, and found the bone again in front, and discovered the corruption continued in the bone, and I treated it, and then I left it, but I could not stop the pain until I had cut off all its branches, and then I restored it with medicines; it became healthy and was cured, and never wanted to resume the operation because of the suffering that the surgeon endured, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had caused him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For as the evacuation of blood is often, but it was completely healthy, and a hard char of the bone remained in its place, and was well disposed and had no harm or opposite at all, nor in the air nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the limb, then it should be done in this manner: take the wires, and draw them up to the top of the head of the bone; and command that they do not extend above; and take another wire larger than the first, and pass it through the socket which is out of the bone, and tie it at the corner of the socket, so that you can pull out the broken corner with the wire or table through the limb as you see and feel the corruption, and do it as many times as you can see and feel the corruption, and do it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	1. If the bone is decayed and does not open, and the decay has spread to a large or small area, if the wound is cut through; then take out the piece of bone, and then separate the part from another part of the decay, and so on until the whole decay is removed; if the decay is in the joint, and the joint is corrupted, and it contains the other part; if the decay is in the continuation of the other joints, and there is no other angle than sharp corners; if the decay is at the tip of the finger or toe, and it is very large, but it does not matter what you do with it, as long as you clean it; if the incision and the sutures cover the bones, according to the seat of the bones and their appearance, and their grossness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, the instrument must adapt to each appearance of the wound; and you should know that the work will show the instrument that you have made, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if the instrument that you have made does not fit according to what it should.
dou feu	For the fire cautery, instruct
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	For the fire cautery, instruct
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, if it's at the joint, if the burn doesn't come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if it's at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it's the death, and it's not worth being afraid of that quantity of courage; and then make as soon as the burn comes or pains: if it comes in the first joint, if the burn after the other joint; and if it comes in pain, if the burn all over; and if it ascends to the thigh, if the burn at the knee joint; and if it comes from the knee, if there's no other engine than the death of the patient; and how the burn or the wound of the member is, if you tie it and extend some parts of one of the ligaments, and others of the other ligament above, and you tighten the char which is between the two ligaments in a wide space, as long as the bone is discovered; then the burn or the wound, and wrap each part with a fold of linen, if it doesn't touch the healthy part, and goes to the patient another wound and aposteme.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	When the joint becomes dislocated due to burns, and it is reduced as soon as possible without using any restraining powders, then return to your medicine as soon as it has been completed, then tie the affected limb with a safety knot, and treat it until it is healthy. And I will tell you what happened to me in my younger days: I had a black spot that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in my younger days, burning all of my fingers; when I saw the corrosion, if I could not cover the finger with my hand, it became healthy; and later, after the corrosion or part of the hand returned, it came to me, and I put these things on the hand after the circumcision of the penis, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I should cut off the hand, and I did not want to lose hope of curing the matter; and she also said that if I cut off my hand, it would not die because the virtues of her were weak; and she despairing returned to her land, and she covered her hand with her own hand, and it became healthy; and I had never heard of anything like this before, but it is possible that other things can be done.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes with dislocation in the shoulder, and it takes a long time for it to cause a great gathering of bones; then it pierces and perforates, and with a leap, it pushes out the bones, and causes them to bend like a vassal's; and the skin that is covered is as delicate as silk, and does not harm the bone, nor the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy" but is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that it cuts through the entire shoulder like a drape, and does not corrupt.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the patient has a fiancé whose hair is turning gray and the corruption is not yet advanced, and the hair is thick and the smell is unpleasant, then the treatment is to apply Egyptian medicine: observe if the breasts are large and the odor is unpleasant, then take ointment, oil, and lotion, and apply it to the wound at the fire for as long as the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take according to your need, and make it in wine and honey, and apply it to the breasts and stop the discharge; let the medicine remain for two hours, then withdraw it by straining; repeat this process as long as the breasts become deformed and the pain subsides, and never use smoke from grapevine wood and water, but only honey and wine, which have the property of cleansing and washing; if the patient cannot bear the smoke, or the medicine does not cure the wound with smoke, then apply the medicine with oil and wine; or apply it with other medicines and ointments, as I have mentioned their properties and uses; if the discharge from the nipple is small and the ointment cannot enter, then make a pouch of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment and apply it to the wound; if the wound is too large, so that the leu or the clistere can only enter a little, and the discharge from the nipple is large, so that the cope or the lower part of the leu is not enough, then apply the medicine.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the belly is in its proper place, do not allow it to be twisted; and if you do not cover the wound with something like a cloth as you see fit, if it appears in such a way that the belly moves downwards towards the bottom where it is, because when the belly is in its proper place, do not allow it to be twisted and if you do not cover the wound with something like a cloth as you see fit, if it appears in part like this: that the belly moves slightly to the side, and does not leave any part of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to put the patient at ease and they should be placed on the side of the wound with the whole body; then cover as much as possible the part of the chest where the patient is hurt, and then sew it up with thread as tight as possible according to the size of the hole, and place it over the hole of the healthy side according to the amount of the hole, and then align the belly with the wound to alleviate the twist, and do not leave the great movement until after one more time; and if the patient is in the part of the chest where the pain is, they often try to twist the belly, and look at what comes from the belly, whether it is poison or little or much, or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or dizziness, and if it has happened that the patient has had an attack of apoplexy or not, and when your medicine has extended itself in a part like this you see the nature that jumps up from the hole of the healthy side, if the breasts have already sunk, and approach the wound; then leave the wound in the morning or evening, and when you clean the wound if the other side changes the movement, and change the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the breasts become wet and indigestible after many years, it is suspected that the nipples are not firm.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	If the venom is subtle and short after a long time, do not despair about your health, as it is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because the wounds are infected and some people heal quickly, and others slowly, and if the breasts become wet and indigestible after many years, it is suspected that the nipples are not firm. And if the wounds are not healing quickly, and the breasts are wet and sore after a long time, and the nipples are not firm, and they are slow to heal, and if the patient is given an ointment, and it is made with rose oil, and red wine in substance; then the ointment is cooked and used, and the same honey is cooked until the ointment is no longer present, or you take a knife and burn and incense, and the broth, and the powder on the honey when it is hot; and then in glue and drapel, and it is applied to the breast, and never once has an apothecary lasted long, and the roots of lily of the valley, which is also like flour and cinnamon; and in use of simple or compounded: grind them, and make powder, and mix with the honey that I said, and apply; and if the cure is long, and it is not cured by this cure, you should know that the corruption is enveloped in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is a grievous wound that affects the finger, either the little or ring finger, or sometimes other parts; and when it becomes infected, if it is not cared for, it causes the gangrene to spread rapidly, and reaches the bone as far as the root of the finger, and may even reach the bone, and then the flesh becomes black and putrid, causing great pain.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and your cure does not help, then you should cut away all the excess of the finger, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the skin, and it begins to prick, and burn, then you should remove the part of the nail that points at the skin, and cut it off high, and cover it with a layer of skin subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining part of the nail medicated and corrosive ointment to heal all; then the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it presses, and flows, because as much as the bone corrupts and is, so it cannot be healed; and if you see the other corroding, if you cut it in the way said before, then treat it as long as it is healthy; and if it is hard, and cut off, and it feels great pain, then it must be treated first; then cover the nail with a layer of wet clay when cutting across the skin, and make sure that the part that was cut does not reach the bone that is far from the nail, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if this happens, then put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the elbow
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The elbow dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is very common, and often it does not cause any pain, and never causes damage, and no one is born with this in the root of the jointure, or the birth is in no one's two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who does not feel pain in any joint, and he who feels pain at the elbow joint, often stops; the size of the one who is dislocated is lighter, in part: the size of it in its root like a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who does not feel pain in the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you have much pain.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the event of a fracture that needs to be fixed from the back, if you are able to first cover the bone completely with a piece of cloth, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The causes that come to us come either at birth, or from wounds, or from burns, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you are able to cover the wound with a piece of cloth, according to its natural form; then put between two sheets or softened linen, so that it does not stick; or put between two pieces of silk as long as the wound is wet, if it comes to that.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When one comes to neither of its two with the hand, if it is not hot, then it does not matter.
des vils	of warts
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Warts are large, hanging in folds of melancholic fullness, which come in more and more members of the chest; and more often in the legs of those who go to prayer and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, it is necessary that you never administer any purging of colic, and then the proper treatment of the basin.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is on the warts, and it draws out the black blood; and the other method is that you let the vein flow, and it drains all.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	1. The size of the wound is as follows: first, apply hot oil to the leg, as much as possible, then tightly wrap it with linen from the groin to the part below the knee; then cut and tie the vein in one, two, or three places, with a wide opening, then remove and let the black blood flow into your hand, from one to the other, as much as the patient's strength allows; then sew it up, and command that it be stitched with black meat threads; and continue the evacuation and cleaning of the wounds as the veins become flat, and do not leave any loose threads.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient's leg is affected in this manner: massage the patient's leg if it has hair, then place it in warm water, and heat the leg until it turns red, and dilate the blood vessels; and if there is no fire, then heat the leg with fire, and then apply it to the long end of the thigh or the area near the ankle; then wrap the leg in cloth, and scrape the leg until it appears when touched, and it will be red and black, and if it seems like a blained cord; then dip the leg in cold water, until the leg is healed with cloth, and then apply it to another leg, three times; then scrape the cloth along the leg until it appears, and then place it on the leg as before, and apply it to another leg as before; then cut a larger piece, or more if needed, and place it on the leg, and then place it on the other leg, and apply it to the second time as before; then take out the leg by leg, until it is all out, and then apply it; and if you cannot pull it out or lift it, if an arrowhead pierces through the thickest part of the leg, and you cannot pull it out or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient; and when you have treated it, place the patient's leg in warm water with fine hair in wine and rose oil; and treat the patient until they are healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the wound is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, but if you cut it wrongly, but do not cut through it; and the stitch if like we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron that is used to cut the wound if it is crooked, and does not cut through it, and it is a thick crook because if it were thin it would cut the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may be located elsewhere than in the legs, and this is the cause that comes from the skin, as the snake's core comes out and goes, it is located between the hide and the cartilage.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if signs of the beginning of this wound appear, it is that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, as if from the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is open, if it is necessary to cover it with a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to two and a half inches wide, and the cloth is moistened, and left on the leg, and every time it is not closed, if the cloth covers the wound and the moisture; and if it is too long, if a part is cut off, and the remaining part is covered with the cloth, and it is not tied at its root, until it is all out; because if you cover it, it will return to the wound and bring pus and fever to the leg, and such a thing must be treated as little as possible and as quickly as possible, and nothing or no sign remains when it is treated with V paumes of long, or X, and some hands came to me, of which it was X paumes long, and when you cover it, if there is any rash or pustule, and it perforates the skin, so that all comes out; and the matter that is dedans must be removed, and no medicine is given through the mouth for any food, then the cure is done as the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never once in this vein do the hands fail, and at the same time when it opens at the joint of the thumb, or the thumb, and a drop of blood comes out, and it suddenly falls; cure the patient if we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of those that are born between leather and char
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "beef disease," because it often occurs in cows, and is a small worm that goes between leather and char, and goes up and down the whole body, and is felt very well in the limbs as soon as it comes out of the hide or when it wants to, and is caused by the food of some humors, such as serpents, snakes, and worms, and ascarides or the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, it goes to the head, and comes to the oil, by chance it returns, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the wound healing and drying, if it cannot be otherwise than when it will: if it comes to pass that you read the leg and the bone from a strong limb well closed, then cut it off and take it out, and put it in a vessel in the char, and do not touch it, if it is cauterized with fire as it dies; and the greatest harm it can do, if it comes to pass that it touches the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the oil, if it strains the hair around it, then cut it off, and take it out; and it is necessary to use the mule with disinfection of solutions of medicines for the humors of men, and avoid foods that are harmful to the body.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from dislocation
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "waxing" in our land, and is a pain that comes to any part of the body, and spreads from one part to another; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called a female patient, and I saw my arm, and I saw a small bump in the vein of my shoulder; and afterwards, I saw it growing as if it were a stone in the shoulder, faster than anything else, as if silver were being cut from the bone; the pain left that arm and moved to the shoulder, and became twisted in the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, until it came to the other shoulder; then I was told that it was dislocating again, as I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed to see how it moved from limb to limb, as I had never wanted this disease to happen in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I wanted to make sure that the limbs moved well and did not cause pain in the joint, but I did not want it to be so. I thought it was because the woman had tightened her corset, discovered the veins, and because of this appeared the constraint; but I did not know if this was true for those who are delicate, who have moist veins and responding veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the curing of this disease, and the patient feels pain, does it open as we have said, if the limb is tightened and then released, and then held as long as the constraint at the knee persists; and cauterize the knee; and if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of those who cause the constraint, if like pus pills, and serapem pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou c
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the wounds they cause.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows includes those with large points, small points, and barbs; those with sharp angles, curved points, and hooks; those that pierce any part of the body in different ways: either by the head, chest, liver, spleen, intestines, bladder, uterus, and other organs. Some arrows also have barbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	If it appears that you are dying from the extraction of this arrow, as the death will come later in other ways; and if the sign does not appear immediately, and the arrow is not visible, then the wound is deep and requires further treatment, such as amputation and wound care.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated and the bone pierces the bone, and the head of the cervix is forced against the eye, it is when there is scotomie, sode, esvertin, and roujor of the eyes, and inflammation and roujor of the tongue, and spasme and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of cole; and by chance it is without nose or ears; and by chance it affects the word and voice; and a jump of the white, moist wound, resembling poulz, and like a gout of char, and if this sign appears, if you hold to the cure, and remove the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it is cut or bruised is that it pains or aches, and it feels as if it is becoming hard, without voiding; and by chance the shoulder becomes still like the thigh, and in a short time black blood comes out, and there is cold and cold frost, and sinking: then the signs of death begin to appear.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arm that is not moving is that there are no signs of swelling from the wound, and the throat is engorged, and the face turns pale, and it sighs high and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	1. If the arrowhead is found in the covering of the chest, if it hits the small ribs; and it causes great pain and suffering; and all the members of the shoulder are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	2. If the arrowhead is found in the stomach by chance, if it jumps from the wound, nothing undigested from the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	3. If the arrowhead is found in the stomach and jumps through the intestine at once, if there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	4. If the arrowhead is found in the bladder and the urine jumps suddenly and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and neck and shoulder and arm and spine and back and ribs and sides and legs, are safe according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the louse or artery, and it is not removed, as I will tell you if I remember, because you are doing it yourself.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to my home one arrow that cut through the root of the nose: I tried to remove it, and it came out from another part of the grease of the ear, and it was safe without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I took out one arrow that was in the grease of the oil outside the paper, and the arrow was safe, and it could not reach any further than the point towards the opposite side, and it was as big as a Turkish arrow, for all it was light on the ears; the wound was safe, and I did not have any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there was a gash in the throat of a man, and it was the Arab gash at the ears: I was the beard, and subtle as I passed, and it was healthy for the Crestians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And there was a gash in the body of a man, which I thought was fatal or from the stomach, and then after 30 days, if it did not change its position; I opened the gash, sewed it up, and it healed, and there was no accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if a man has a gash in the side or back, and it is sutured; and the wound heals, and does not change its natural positions, and does not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see if another man, who cuts a wound in his face, and feels the pain; and delays for some time to suffer great pain; and then other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And a wound was found on the face of the king, who was cut by a nail in the left part; and it was a deep wound; and it was all sewn up. I was called to the care after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried it with all my subtlety, and I did not feel it; and I felt a sharp pain and a sting in the left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that this was the tip of the shoulder I placed my hand on the uneven joint, because the shoulder did not swell; and I seemed to feel the dislocation.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed my hand on the uneven joint, and relieved the pain on the right side, and held for a long time until the patient felt the dislocation in his knee; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed my hand on the uneven joint, and relieved the pain with medicine that was corrosive to the skin, until it was over, and I felt the end of the shoulder that was sticking out of the knee; then I put the end of the plague in the same place with the medicine, as soon as the patient's shoulder became visible; and it healed well in four months, and then I removed the needles and the threads on both sides, and could not stop; therefore, I continued to refine and invent ways to strangle, as soon as I had made the needles well, according to how the form will come at the end of this chapter, as soon as I see it, and restore the plague.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	The patient thinks that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it therefore, and the wound was sore, and the health of the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I did not say the quality of extracting some arrows, if you put your care only on what I do not tell you, because the books cannot make everything look good; but the masters of the art can make good things out of poor ones, and of what is present and deficient, they use nine or ten operations and nine instruments, as the things drawn down in this art come out badly.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are made of hair according to two ways: either by the hand or they enter, or by another part; and the one that is thrown by the hand or it enters, is an arrow that enters in the flesh, and it has never been thrown once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, if the pain is so great that the bones are exposed and the issue is delayed, and then she becomes fixed in the bone, and she cannot move if any joints are left, and each joint is tightened; therefore she jumps, and if she does not jump, if the pain is so great that it pierces through all parts of the body subtly, as long as the bones are exposed, then the issue will be delayed and the limb will be fixed.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrowhead becomes fixed in the bone and is wedged into one of the lobes of the liver or any other accidents I have mentioned to the surgeon: if he does not remove it, but leaves it as long as it remains even after some time, because the arrowhead becomes wedged in the liver, it is a matter of life and death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the dislocation is not severe and only occurs in the bone, and does not cause any other accidents, then the patient will not have any serious problems.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is severe and cannot be reduced, then the patient should immediately seek medical attention as I have advised; then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the dislocation is not visible in the limb and cannot be felt, then the patient should try to locate it using any available instruments; and if you feel it, if there is no blood loss or nerve damage, then treat the wound as much as the pain allows; and cut or crush the ears of the limb as much as possible, until you can amputate it; and be careful not to cause unnecessary pain.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you do not once, if the bone until it is read in order to be torn, then it will be pulled out, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the dislocation of the bone causes it to move in the opposite direction, if you do not follow what we have said in this chapter; and you should be made an incision on the nerve and vein, and make an opening according to how you think you can remove the arrow while being careful, or quickly, or firmly, or gently; and make the patient according to the shape of the bone as it was when the arrow hit it, because this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you do not, if they make it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The first line of the text translates to: "The arrow that comes from another part, or it opens no thing of him, or his skin is shrunk in some place where one can see or feel it: then remove it, as much as the barbs can take, and then extract it: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you turn your round hand around as it enters the bone, until it expands the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, if you leave it alone, and then continue the extraction as much as it can; and if it is an arrow, if it is not drawn out, if it pierces the instrument's hair, and you see the point entering the instrument's hair; then draw it out, and if the arrow is the instrument's hair, if the point enters it, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead is lodged, then it comes to pass that you cover the entire wound or the venom is, and then you cure the wound as best as you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the shoulder, belly, intestine, or chest, and it protrudes, and you cover it, then you press on it; and take care not to press on the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then clean the wound as much as possible; and cure it as long as it remains healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tines used to remove arrows is similar to the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are three ways of cutting: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The hooked end of the hair is similar to the beak of a sparrow, pointed at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown in this figure:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the tines for driving and pulling is similar to this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Common veins of large size:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins that are safe to cut include the 31st, of which the head is the 16th, which is to say: the two branches that are after the ears, which are called the "herbage" arteries; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and the veins that are in the two eyes, which are called the "aspires"; and the vein that is cut at the front; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the girdles that are on the collar; and the veins that are in the lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called the "augeherich"; and the veins that are at the bottom of the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	1. The veins that are commonly found in the arm are V in each arm: one is the cranial, and it is on the western costal side, and it is called the "giant's vein" or "vain of the head"; and the femoral is called the "fasten", and it is composed of the cranial and the basilic, and they are called the "giant's vein of the chest"; and the basilic is on the eastern costal side, and it is called the "giant's abdomen", and it is below the femoral, and it is the one that is found, which opens manifestly into the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The safeguard is the vein that lies between the ear and the anus, and if it swells; and in the leg, there are three veins: one is the corbicle of the left shoulder, which is the small intestine on the left side of the chest; the second one is called "nisse," which is at the right shin; and in the other leg, there are three veins similar to these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The benefit of the veins after the ears is that it helps with catheters and drainage; and the quality of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you cleanse the patient's leg or the veins are of a rough cloth; then strain the patient's hand over a vessel, as long as the veins appear behind the ears in the dependent part of the chest: take the lancet, and cut through the vein just above the bone, then gently hold your hand on all the veins until you cop and the leather and the vein well through, and make the suction as long as you see; then let it go and hold it until it is healed, as you see; and I have already said the incision and the cauterization of the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	1. The health of the two arteries in the temples, if they are old and twisted, and hardened, and used to the heat of the body, and the moisture of the tears affects them; and the quality of the salt is such that it is as I say: and it is that the physician draws his collar, as long as the veins open widely; and it feels the cold of your thumb, and then swells; then gently place the tip of the vein at your index finger, and cut the lancet, and gently hold the vein and the cup, just as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to draw out the salt according to your need; then remove the needle, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton; and then form the wound, and leave it as long as it is healed; and we have spoken of their extraction and the suffering they cause, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient's face is the most important part of the leg if it is as sick as the head with ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and bruising; and examine it if it is that the patient pulls his neck with his hands, as the eye appears; then take the instrument called "forceps," which is in this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and firmly with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; then tell the patient to straighten the neck, and hold the eye until it is safe and never again use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Everyone, it only needs the flames to be too much; and the right way, because the bone is close, and by chance the flames break when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The salvation of the two veins that are in the two arms if they help the bones, and the tongue, and the mouth, and the eye in the oil, and the diseases of the face; and the quality of their salvation if it is that the malady strains its collar by twisting any limb, as before; then the salvation, and so the salvation of the two veins, a little long and a little wide flame a little large, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance very sharp; then make careful incisions as much as you can, and then sew it up, and hold it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	If the wound of the vein is not deep, and it is not large, and it is not a disease of the face, as if it were a wound that comes in the face, and there is much pain; and the quality of the wound if it is that the scar is sticking to the neck, then hold the wound in your left hand, and take the subtle flame long, and touch the eye with the end of the flame, and press it between the two eyes, for the vein does not open very well, and it will now start to bleed; and do not make it too much, and make incisions as needed, then sew up carefully according to your needs, and leave it one night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The head of the shoulder aids in the relief of pain, at the beginning of massage, and for various diseases, such as empyema, corrosion, herpes, and warts; and the quality of the ointment is that it pulls the neck down on both sides, as we have said; and if the master is standing before the patient's shoulder, and the patient's shoulder is pulled up, then cleanse the vein for a short distance, as much as possible, then draw out the blood flow, or as much as possible; then perform another part on the other shoulder, then loosen the limbs, and pull them gently so that the patient does not strain; and leave it in the morning if the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips of the deer is helped in closing the mouth, and preventing decay of the gums, and cracks in the lips, and sores and infections.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient stand before you, and pull their collar as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the eyes, of which one is on the left side and the other on the right, and they are black, and have dark-colored teeth: therefore, treat both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then the largest of each part, and so do the eyes that are inside and outside, for it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Of the health of the tongue if it is dislocated after the head is healed, and it is at the throat, and there are diseases of the eyes, and there are diseases of the mouth; and it is important to note that the healthier it is, if the patient has moisture between his hands before the sun, and wets the tongue, and looks at each side of a black vein: healthy therefore both, and do not alarm too much, for dislocated are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The common veins that are usually healthy are in two ways: either by pressing on all the fire with a wide flame, or by an olive-like subtle one if it is as narrow as the trenching, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the size and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the burned face is such that it is named after the fire, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the skill to open the flat veins of large blood clots that contain large blood clots and trouble; and this is the form of the burned olive-colored face.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle in its application, and it is safer for the subtle veins, or if there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The salve of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are desoz in the throat, and the collar, and the piles, and the stomach; and it is necessary for the healer to make it wise, and to ward off the artery that is desoz.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If the fire cautery is applied and blood comes out, if it is intended to be burned, as I have said; and it should not be pricked with hot iron, but rather cut with sharp blades.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the sutures do not open clearly, if you pull on them and change another one; or you do not want any rain in the wound, or you are in pain in the arm: it opens clearly; and the flame is applied with hot iron, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the wound closing, if you continue to pull on the arm and touch the wound as far as you can, then sign the wound with your thumb, and then tie the arm, and burn the vein with hot iron; and watch that you do not injure the artery as you see the wound swell, because it is the artery: close the stitch.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you see coming out of the top like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, you know that there is no artery: then do this, and put your hand far away, then hold the bone steady, which many times happens; let go of the arm, and leave it, and do not move the member; and so be brave, and do not move until it is safe.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not stained, and it hurts, and the doctor is not present, then the artery may be open, because the head of the return; then stain it.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	1. Take a scalpel from the fistula, and use it to cut, and then take one of the halves and tie it well with the other; if it is not stuck, it's good; but if not, then use the powder that stains blood, and the stains are not much in other positions for the small wound of the wound, and the pain of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	2. The health of the vein is helped if it treats the wound with blood from the head and chest, because it is made of basilic and cranial, as we have said; and it should be cut for the nerve that is wounded, and if it does not cut too much at once, and it trueves the nerve, and it becomes swollen and healthy, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it should be cleaned with the instrument again; and remove the nerve from your body.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is blood between the two veins, if it is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The salve of the head is helpful, if it attracts blood to the chief and helps the wounds; and it is most useful in touching with olive oil or mercurial ointment, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not affect the nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In short, it is best to use the softer part of the skin, and do not hurt anyone the first time, and continue; and by chance, some people's faces are affected, but it does not hurt anyone the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your perception.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about health is that it is not a permanent state, but rather a continuous effort to maintain it and avoid diseases. And the health should be made in one of the three veins: the head, fast, and basilic; and it is necessary to do so at the beginning of the prayers, and during the fasting and after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and it is necessary to do so on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is maintained with diseases has no fixed determination, but rather depends on the amount of sleep or nutrition, in all hours and at all times; and it is not necessary to make health for children up to 14 years old, and for women who are only breastfeeding for no more than four months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When the patient is healthy and has not passed 60 years, if it comes to passing intestines of a light chicken, if it has been held back by ties, then the intestines do not become superfluous with impure foods and wastes; nor does it become so when too much meat or wine is consumed, even if it is eaten, nor when alcoholic beverages are taken; and if the patient becomes unhealthy after passing a bowel movement, vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplies in women and men, and increases in childbirth, and in watching and dining, and if all virtue, or by something of the arm or cold; then subtly the humors, if it is not too large, by meat and drink and medicines, if you have that power; then enter a bath, nothing else does not please, to subtly reduce the fever, as we have said; and take care of your work, and pleasure, and luxury, and appearances; and be loyal and just, and be healthier than those who are made sick, and rub the arm two or three times or four times, then tighten the ligaments; for if it is too tight or small, it cannot be removed without; then rub the patient's hands as long as the limbs heat up, and feel them; then burn the ointment of a little oil on the hand, then put your other hand on the wound with a little oil, then apply the ointment to the wound that was not injured, so that the wound does not become infected.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like cords to the healer, and if they are too many that are plain of ventsitude, then when one puts it on fire, if it retreats from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of those; and if it closes the vein, then it is the wound too tight, for which it is necessary that the healers be informed about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then it continues a little less of that joint or as soon as possible, and if it is not bent, it is necessary to bend it.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	1. If it is read that it is bent, and the patient becomes anxious, let it remain for one or two hours, and do not tie the arm: by chance, some gangrene appears; do not enter the bath, then resume the cure if it pleases you; and if the wound is small, or the bone is not cut subtly and you doubt that there is as much blood as you have seen, if proud in that wound as in all the fire, and the work is done quickly, because it is read that it is bent; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the knee swell, if it does not recover its health, and put in a little drop of oil, as it soothes the warm blood in the body, and makes it dry in this swollen knee that the oil touches; and then maintain the oil on each healthy vein that you make healthy; for it strengthens the course of the warm blood; and this itself makes triae and bowels of dust, when it is put on the knee; if subtly it does not come out and spreads when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If you have many abscesses that come again and again, as soon as it is only healthy once or the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put a wet sponge on the knee in cold water and on a little heat, and hold it for an hour; and it must be done after the recovery of the warm blood from the vein, and if the swelling remains on the knee after any time without black or green, if you do not know why; and if you see, put nothing of aloes or remnant of myrrh in the juice of mastic, mustard, or appearance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there has been gangrene and appearance in the health of the basilica: then place your hand there, and if you tighten the bone with the compression of your hand, it is this appearance that is unfavorable.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not place anything on it other than what we have said, because by chance without the artery; but I first apply a plaster to harden the bone, then another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each sin according to its quantity and color of the sin.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, let it be red as long as it is red; and if you see it large, let it be large as long as it is small; and if it is too cold, let it be cooled.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	1. It is necessary for the one who is in pain and forceful, and has skill in extracting poison, to make a larger wound, and have wide flames; and for the weak one, the opposite, and it is healthier and more often successful, and it should be made healthier by cutting across, not by pinching; and this method of healing is saved from the dislocation of poison and the weakness of nerves, and it is worth that the long wound is not wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	1. For the one whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give moistened pomegranate juice; if it is feverish, three times or four times as much pain. And if it is of cold complexion, before the moistened pomegranate juice in honey syrup, or honey aromatic with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a pleasant-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If the patient feels unwell after the evacuation of blood, if it is wet with char and subtle scented essence, and uses other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter of sincope for the removal of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he sees his arm swelling and getting worse, if it happens, when he is weakened by great health, that he becomes stronger and stronger, according to the amount of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If he sees his arm swelling after the first health and he is strong, if he becomes stronger in seven hours after the first health, or after the next hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever appears to be healthier from another perspective, if it should be healthier to be healthier the next day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has a fever from the cold that has already affected his body, and it increases; if it comes to treating large amounts, and opening the chest as much as possible; then when you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse as soon as it becomes healthy, so that the dead do not return through the lungs, and this happens many times when the healthier ones are neglected; and it is necessary to see if the arm becomes pale and the sickness returns the second time, and the chest is closed, so that you press on it; but if it is cold, it should be extended as much as possible, because it would be dangerous; but leave it as soon as it becomes healthy the second time; or you do not go to the tip of the flame, when the cold that has frozen the chest's veins is about to come out, and put your finger in the wet cloth that has been put on the fire, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is filled with blood, if it is left without being strained and as long as the abscess is not relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw the blood twice, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in the other hand.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein becomes healthy in the arm because it is composed of the vein.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the vein becomes healthy if the patient presses his hand in hot water as soon as the flesh becomes red; then it should be tied temporarily, if the vein is seen to flow well, then the blood now flows through the vein without being too large or too long; and the wounds are large, and they are healed well near the joint of the hand, and if none can be sewn, then the hand is put in hot water, and the blood is allowed to flow through the vein as much as possible; and if this is done, it is not better to put the hand in hot water again, because it is put in more than necessary; and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been pierced or cut.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The patient's hand is injured if it is exposed to all diseases of the stomach, and this is how it should be done: clean the hand, dry it with hot water, as long as the wound is not closed; if it is through, and you sew it all together, if it does not hurt at all; and do not apply too much pressure, because the skin is bare of flesh and cartilage, and then put the hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be closed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated as much blood as your skill allows, if you put the vein oil and seal it tightly, and then do for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient's hand, if it is affected by the mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said to the left hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the spleen is beneficial for all diseases that are unhealthy to the body, such as diseases of the liver, retention of flowers, and disease of the lungs, and diseases of the arms and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is that if the patient has fever, and the vein is washed with cool water as it bleeds, and the joints are anointed with the pus; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and through the pus in order to stop the rains; then the rain is healthy or larger than the ankle, or at the ankle, which is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cleanse the wound with your own hands, if it is infected with filthy nerves, and the wound is large as in cutting; then let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be cured, then reset the wound with your own hands and let the vein dry well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wound heals the first time, but recurs the second time in a short period because the lesion is salty; do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and then make a syrup of the other wound identically.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The lesion of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the foot, and its cure is the relief of the pain in the thigh, when it is infected with pus.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his health if he is infected or bathed, and draws out the ankle IV, as he twists; otherwise, it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then the healthy in all ways that you can, and crossing; and it is wise to cover it, as it is revenged by male hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not cover it, then the healthy no rain from the one who opened or down the small toe, and to the little foot, and you wear a bandage; and make as much blood as you see, and then loosen the knot, and put on cotton and draw it; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	Of the wounds of childbirth
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horn, or iron, or glass; and ventilation is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventilation, which is made by cutting and drawing out blood, is done in two ways: either it is all on fire, or hot; and ventilation which is made by cutting and extracting blood is made in fourteen days of the course of the corps, of which some are all in one part, and the others in another part, and the others in the costeis of the collar; the ventilation of the chief is made at the menton; the ventilation of the shoulders is made at the elbows; the ventilation of the crupies is made at the wrists; the ventilation of the arms is made at the shoulders; the ventilation of the legs is made at the knees; the ventilation of the ankles is made at the feet; and the ventilation does not touch any veins, only small ones that are scattered in the course of the body, and therefore it does not cause any harm to anyone, as we do with wounds; and it is necessary that it be dressed, and neither hot nor cold, in no disease that comes from repletion, as long as the corps is vuidiez.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	1. If necessary, due to illness or habit, if the patient coughs once in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and more often in each ten days; for there are those who, when they cough, have a heavy chest; and if such people have fullness and redness in their face, and in their chest, and at the collarbone, and have dark spots; and those who have a chill in their stomach, and lose their tongue, and vomit blood; and if there are those who sneeze, and see red blood, and white blood, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and at the same time when it is three hours after midnight, we command our patient to fast.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The health of the head helps in relieving the pain, and it is only after all the blood has been evacuated that this fasting is allowed; and this fasting should be done under the supervision of the physician or midwife, as it can cause great harm to those who have cold complexions or are pregnant, because this can lead to serious complications. For this reason, only those who have cold diseases should fast.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal, if they become incapacitated, and therefore it is necessary to put the gauze a little further down due to the fear of incapacity.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The collar is placed on the neck of the shoulder and the head, and for this reason it is useful in the treatment of the chest, and to remove the catheter, and for all, and to relieve; and it is necessary to put it on a little loosely, because if it is too tight, it can cause incapacity or stomach or liver.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The collar is placed on the neck of the head and can cause pain in the shoulder, and it helps to alleviate and relieve, and prevent and relieve, and at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the position of the shoulder; and it is necessary that you command the patient to put his hand on the place where he wants to put it, so as not to cut the artery, and to avoid causing dislocations.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wind passes over the neck if it is worth for the disease of the mouth, and the corruption of the genitals, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the throat of the sore throats of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind passing over the shoulders is worth for the disease that comes from chilblains and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind passing over the elbows is worth as much as the three wrists of the arms, because it attracts blood from these large wrists; and commands the patient not to force too much, because the lew is naked of char, and knows how to nerve and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The first line of the text translates to: "If the vacuum that is used at the crotch causes harm and diseases, then it must be large and sharp, so that it can effectively pierce; and by chance, if it is too subtle, it may break; and it causes great pain.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The second line of the text translates to: "If the vacuum used on the legs is open, it attracts blood from all parts of the body, relieves old pains from the knees, thighs, and bladder, and stretches the vagina; they are in the region of the second toe, and make the body weaker after long use, and cause pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	1. The manner to place the forceps if you put it first empty, and then subsequently, and move it gently, and continue doing so until you see the red and swollen lip, and the appearance of the wound is open; then firm, and replace the forceps, and take care in the arrangement of the horns, as there are some who have such a strong desire, and clear purpose: if it happens to injure once, and make large wounds, and a few are shallow; and squeeze gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	2. And if it is large, if it gets injured twice: the first time by making the vein more subtle.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is not very soon, then it will be wounded the third time; and when we want to draw out little blood, only once does it suffice.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw out blood, if we often do so; and if it is not quickly done, and the wound is deeply felt, and it suits the one with thick skin and hardness, and those who have pores, that you apply the oils of opening and dissolving to the shoulders: if this is the case, violet oil, or honey-scented almond oil, or castor oil; and if it is in winter, vernal water, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take olive oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is healthy and wide pores, it is not recommended to put oil on it, but it should be washed after the incision of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or onion water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have moisture in their mouth, if they rise from sleep, or from rose water, and from myrtle water, and from sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superfluity rise from wine viel, or from ague of the sweat, or from decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other such things; and they do not become healthier by blowing their nose before bathing, but after the bath, an hour or two; and they do not sleep after blowing their nose, and they must wake up when it is time to blow one's nose and when one has blown one's nose.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And when those who are healthy become cold and their bodies are too hot and inflamed, if they should pray for cool things, like apples and endives and greens in the milk, and similar things; and they drink punch, and char of chorizo, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	1. And those who have a cold complexion, if they sweat honey-like sap, and wine that is odorant moien, which is between viel and noveil, and drink little, and drink poc, and drink pucins and small oiselz and pijons; and when they start to vomit, it must drink more than mengier; and it is necessary to give some men any time triaicle or muscate before the ventosacion, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let them be subtle in giving it, but only those who are chaut le boivent.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	1. The wounds that are made to hurt are those that are made on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and the bowels and the bowels and the belly, for this member does not suffer much pain from wounds, and only feels it when it attracts pain from one member to another, as we do with the breasts when it is healthy; to relieve the viscosity that is in the member, as we make wounds on the stomach and the bowels to anesthetize the member; and to relieve the pain, when it has oozing or piercing, if it relieves by its attraction the oozing, or draws out the piercing from its loins; and it is made when we put it on the liver and the spleen when it has retained much moisture, and these wounds are administered empty to suck only; and they are never administered together with fire, and never with cold tea, as in diseases that cause pleurisy, and in this manner we fill the wound with hot water, or with water that has been cooked herbs in it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two wide and half palm-sized parfois, and it has one cost or edge around the little puncture I, so as to bind a needle, and it is of iron or steel, in front so that it does not bend the patient's arm at the time of putting it on the limb; and in the mileau there is a hole of iron or steel for a screw to be inserted, and it is either large or small according to the disease and the age of those who take them; for the vacuums of children are different from vials, and thin than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	1. And it must be put on the dressing over the member: take the wax candle or liniment, and insert it into the hole of the dressing that is in the hole of the wax candle, so that it shines at the end of the dressing that it does not burn the patient; then put it over the member, and you must be as tight as we have said, if you see that it rises, and then remove the dressing; and take the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you can.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	2. In the dressing that is used when the patient is ill with catarrh, there is no hole or percussion, and it is not used unless it is flat with a cold, and is put over the member only when it is flat with a cold; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	1. Withouts are not plucked except in members where it is impossible to put on stockings due to their smallness, such as the lips and genitals, and similar parts; and in these parts, if they are without withouts of char, like does or neis, and others like this; and the quality of the user is that when you find withouts which are in soft waters, if you take them; you put them in a soft water bath, as long as they are not pregnant, and have nothing in the belly; then it is healthy for the vein and the wind, then clean the member as much as it is red, and put on the withouts; and when they are flat and smooth, if it is possible to put on a wind, it is put on, because this is after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	1. If not, then lift the leg of silk, and then the hot one, well, and then the stretch it; and if the wound is too large after the corset of the bones, then soak a piece of linen in cold water, and put it on, as long as the bones are not swollen; and if the bones swell, then put on vitriol or gas, or similar things, as long as they are swollen; or put on half of the legs of grapes, and leave them as they burn on the leg, if it now sticks; and if you have more of this, then take other bones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take on their medicine, then frothe the league of the salve as much as it will, and then put it on, and as soon as they feel the soothing, if they do not heat up; and when you see that they are taking in the powder and the flax or the hemp, or the cinder, if they start to burn now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of wounds
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These cauteries are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they are both a treatment for wounds and a way to dislocate bones.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Tell me, dear friend, what you think of this cauterization, that the folk do not see it as a way to treat wounds, and that they have never seen any ancient books or letters on the subject; and for this reason, science has been neglected in our land, because I have never found any book on the subject, and neither have you, except perhaps through the science of ancient books, or by my own study and treatment of the subject, by experiment, and by habit of my life; and I have described in this cauterization what is contained in it, and summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the dislocations that are made, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the sum of words and chapters or sentences, and moreover, to prove it, if those who have experienced it believe and learn this noble art, and they teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or twisting occurs in any part of the body, if you do not treat the wounded man on both sides, nothing will help, as weakness of the heart, or childbirth, or wounds; or if you hold him tightly, it is not very tight, or too loose; and if the wound is cold, it is to know that the drinks are cold, and do not drink beer, nor eat thin grasses, and do not fill your belly with too much meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt of apoplexy or expansion of matter in the member; if the wounded man regains consciousness after being under the influence of the drug he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient's flesh that causes great swelling, or if there is viscosity, like wheat cooked in vinegar, and tests, and pies, and sausages, and meat of goats, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the healing of swelling is reduced and the fracture is healed as quickly as possible.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that fractures of bones and deformities cannot be well recovered or mended according to their nature by the care of the limbs, but rather those that are too flexible, like those of small children; but if it is necessary to cut into the bone and large tendons that are torn and joined together, as much as possible, and not to cut too deep, and for this reason it is necessary to remove large pieces of flesh, like we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that there are many ways to cut.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the cutting of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you all the ways of cutting in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a cut that goes through and another that just pricks, like the width of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a cut with a wound, and a cut is just a small gash.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each cut has its own engine and its own instrument in restoration, according to what remembers come to his head; and it is the fracture of the bone by which the tooth is torn, and opened well by defense, and some pressure of the hand; and when it is not tortuosity or incision, but the pain is great, and the patient does not have a fracture, it may be tortuosity, or gash, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it with your hand alone, but use the medicines that will come later, and then gently pull it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And examine the fracture that will occur in the fall, and the two parts that are disjointed, it is now appropriate to gently place them back together, unless the wound opens and bleeds; and if the wound opens and comes, as long as there is no pain, until the wound is calmed, then it should be placed gently and wisely at the point where you can easily and carefully, and consider that the restoration of the part is lighter than the restorations of other parts or pieces; then gently pull, as it will come later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	1. And if in the bone of the foot, if it is broken into two parts, if it is hands or arm, or a part of your arm, or a cord, or a cord and your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are evened out, if you reset by your hands the additions in their places in the muscles that you push, and keep that by your effort does not cause further injury or pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	2. And it feels good in your hand if it seems that it is not well: if it curves beautifully, and is not strained too much, do not press as they who come by their effort cause the aposteme chaut and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the member is at rest, if the patient carefully guides the helper so that it does not move, neither by watching nor sleeping nor turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the member is firmly held so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it does not feel pain, if it is not yet at rest, and it is necessary to put the member in order so that it does not feel any pain; and keep it steady so that it remains in its place, so that twisting does not occur when it is restored; and the quality of the broken member is according to what I am saying.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It is known that the broken member has different sizes in smallness, breadth, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For the patient has many limbs, as if they were threads and similar things: if it comes to wrapping them with linen and similar materials; and those that are large, like a thick rope and leg: if it comes to wrapping them with a wide and hard rope, because the large ones tighten all the large member, and draw it evenly, unless it has no knot; then it is lightly wrapped with light bands, three or four times according to the member, and the hand is tightly tied around all the member, then go to the end of the fracture and draw it less than the fracture itself; and soften the member a little and a little, as you please to give a large part of the healthy part of the leg, then take another member, and turn the wrist towards the broken part of the leg; then return to the part opposite the fracture, and draw it gently, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first step of the fracture; then put between the wrapped limbs of linen or silk, as they are equal, and then put all the stitches well made, if it has no gape or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If it is inflamed or infected, apply something soothing to the inflammation, such as a poultice of oats, or a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar, or a poultice of palm leaves, and make sure they are according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	However, it is necessary that the dressing placed on the wound be larger and broader than the others; and also longer if it is for a small or large member; then tighten the bandage as you did in the first case, then tie a string around it, as you did in the first case, but do not make it too tight; and the string must be clean, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of linen; for if the string is too thick, like the works of the fools who make their laces of linen thread, it can cause harm, because the wound cannot be held even if it is too fine, and only one can be obtained between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is examined by the hands of the maledictions after they are cleansed with water, if they make holes in the linen or lace, if it does not cleave.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the horn is broken, I will tell you the cure for this after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And I advise you that it is not easy to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not possible to put the splints on immediately after birth or within seven days, according to your aposteme's experience; and here is the way the ancient emplaustres were used to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: and that you take flour which is between the miller's millstones, and mix it with a lot of urine, and make this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore fractures in more ways, and even in women and children, because it is neither too harsh nor too harsh.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Other methods for repairing breaks and dislocations and twists: take barley and linen and glue and Arabian gum and ginger, and rosemary; mix with aloes, and alechil; and make a powder, and mix with honey; if the complexion of the face is hot, use this plaster as it is well-composed, and restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Other methods for plasters that benefit twists: take Arabian gum and vinegar, and rosemary; mix with aloes, and alechil; acetic acid (vinegar), and cook well, and administer with honey or honey and milk.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of splinting include joints and bones, which help alleviate the pain resulting from their dislocation, and the breakage: take fresh leaves, and mix them with oil and warm butter, and place them on the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not repair, but they are beneficial for alleviating inflammation and directly reducing bone pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of splinting that repairs broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth oak leaves, and bind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of splinting for repairing bone fractures and reducing inflammation.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	1. Take the root of malva, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of violets, and each part in equal amounts; and boil, and distill with wine, and wash the limbs with moist urine, or with fresh urine, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	2. Another method for healing more quickly than the first is when the abscess is severe and comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	3. Take the roots of malva, and linseed meal, balsam, honey, and salt, and each part in equal amounts; and boil, and distill with salty or sweet urine, or with wine, according to the choler of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In the book of Ypocras, it is stated that no material is used to set a broken bone for restoration, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen suggests that when setting a broken bone for restoration, one should use dry, hot things, such as mustard and aloes, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to alleviate pain and injury: take mugath and chevolz of ox hooves, or the feet of oxen, and vismalve, and seil igalment, and the boils, and make an application and put it on the affected part.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain in his shoulder joint, or stiffness, if it does not come from the hands; if it comes from the shoulder, whether it is painful or prickly, itching or swelling, if you hurry, and remove it, and now apply the plaster; take a light cloth, moisten it with seawater, dip in cold water, and raise the limb as much as the prickle stops, and soothe the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, smooth with cold or rose oil, and tie with a thread, as long as you are sure not to have fever; and let the inflammation in the member subside, and soothe the pain, then resume the gentle application, a little plaster, and do not strain it too much; and gradually as it gets better.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the wound is raw and bleeding and painful and swollen, and you have skill in bandaging and dressing, then if it recurs, as you did at first, do as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the member does not respond to what we have said, then do not delay more than three days, or four, or seven, or twelve; and never longer than that, until the splint is broken and approaches the bone; therefore, tighten the restraint more than before, and the tissue will grow larger as I have said before; and if you see the member becoming drier than it should be, soak it with warm water every time you remove it, and do this every day, and cut away the norrissemens at the member; thus, the norrissemens will be removed from the member, and the wound will heal: this is harmful, and if it is not cured, then I know of no other remedy than constant lassification and proper overying.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounding
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of wounds are there, and various shapes, and the causes are assigned; for there are wounds made by the blow of a spear, and the whole bone is fractured as if it were a bone, like when it is cut or broken; and therefore this kind of wounding is called "fracture.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear strikes the bone through various senses of the eye, and is called this kind of wounding "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is a percussion that is impaled, or a cut or of piercing, or of the cheek under the pierce, or of other kinds.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent fracture, which brings the skin that is exposed to the bone or it is on the bone, and this wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If there is a wound that is repaired in the bone as subtle as possible, and it is a small cut, and for this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by injury, or by piercing, or by something seeming, and it lets the piece of the bone enter, and it is the same as when they heated the cauldrons when they were burned; if it enters through the hole.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are more cases of those who have moist bones, like that of a child; and they occur in all these ways of fracture that are lightly broken, like these; and I will speak of this in their language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us consider all the ways of fractures by the methods used for them, and by the corruption of the char that is used.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the capsule is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone, and rubs it with the finger, if the black fracture is open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, keep a close watch on the patient, and if you see no accidents of the midwife, such as vomiting of cole, admission of understanding, extension, and pulsation, and fever, and the limbs to become red and swollen, and other similar signs in other cases, that cannot be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an accident, and you expect a cure, then begin it.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the bone comes first to you, and it is in the wrist, then it is necessary to cut the bone before the fortieth day of the month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this way, then if you cut the bone before the ninth month, then the skin of the bone must be corrupted, and the accident that we have mentioned will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If the fracture of the bone comes to the skin that covers the eye, then it is necessary to cut the broken part if you want to: and it is that you pull the head of the malady that has been cut, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and uncover the figure of the wound more than you can, and if the sanc comes out to reveal the bone, or the apothem, then help what must be done, and it is that you fill the eye with oiled powdered linen; and rest the wound as long as the sanc is calmed and assured of not deviating from its course, and then begin to cut the bone, and it is made according to two ways of incision: one way if the cut is narrow at the end, and it is in this form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then the other size is greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp, and they are made of iron; and you perform them lightly so that you do not cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, then you must pierce it through, otherwise, you must first make holes with needles, and they should not be too small, lest they go further into the bone; and there should be a margin or circle around each hole that does not pass over the bone; and you must have more holes, if every time you hit the bone with the edge of the needle, you have needles for your test; and this is the form of the three ways of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to perceive the broken bone is that you put the ice on the bone, and turn it as often as you can until you feel that the bone is perceived; then put the ice on another part a little later, and then do everything around, then cut as the incisions in the bone that is between the fingers, and do it as subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, as you touch the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools you have like needles, tweezers; and make sure you do not touch the skull or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and treated the bone, if it comes that you resort to the instruments that are supposed to be like an incision, but it is more slender and subtle than the other incision; and if it does not cause any small bones, neither any scales, if the soft bones of the fingers are lightly touched with the tools we have mentioned, then cure the wound with tents and bandages that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of opening is when it is said by the Galiens, who are more skilled; and the larger one, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the fracture opening is wide, so that once you have removed this part, if you measure from the center of this incisional lenticular chief, then the form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the part is torn in two, if the cutting is towards the bone; then gently press a small maillet on it, so that you lightly touch the whole bone, and be well guarded by the thread that is loose; if it is near the bone, if the bone is light, because it is easily injured, and causes pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only covered by muscles, and it has small pieces, then cover them with the rough asperity, and file the scales with a subtle raser, which you must have several quantities of, to meet the needs of each joint according to its type and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you sharpen before with coarse graters, and then with more subtle ones, and continue doing this as much as it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other hair removal and subtle fracture, it is necessary to meet the needs according to its address; and this is something that cannot be corrected for those who have studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	1. If the fracture is discovered, it comes to pass that you must preheat the linen according to the size of the wound, and apply olive oil, and place it on the wound; then take another doubled strip of linen, and apply vinegar and olive oil, and place it on the first strip; and do this more gently than you would, so as not to burn the flesh, and then administer by other strips, and do not strain it too much, only until the wound has healed enough; and leave it for one or two days, until the swelling is pacified, then remove it, and administer medicines such as these: roots of various kinds, flour of times, powder of incense, aristolochum, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer subsequent medicines without suture; and guard that the wound be clean, so that you do not leave the ointment or bandage assembled on the skin, for if the bandage assembles on the skin, it can cause great harm to the patient; for if you place something moldy on the wound, it can cause great pain to the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If there is no accident coming to the patient, and if we have said so, then it is doubtful whether there is any danger.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no harm comes from the medicine we have put on it, then a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and the rest is made of wax, should be applied; then the cure will be done in the manner of cures that it covers, as long as it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is said that the two parts of the shoulder never break, or only one, because they are two bones; and this is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off your small toe or nail and make the break even on your index finger, and in the pouch as long as it does not deviate from its natural figure; and do this lightly, and let the patient feel no pain through your guidance.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part of the nail that cannot reach the toe, then you should put it even at the head of a large braid.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in the second part, then you should repeat the first joint and restore the original toe, if possible; if not, after the ninth or tenth day, when the wound is healed, then cut off the tip of the nail, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you cut one part, the other will also be cut; and if the wounds are large, they fill the cavities with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no restorer would say that you should smooth the wounds with a burr, and each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems to me that it is well, but they must be smoothed in the making of oakum and ground honey, and then leave the wound, as long as the bone is hard and the cartilage is tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And no time is it ever cut on the neck of the wound, and if it is soft and wrinkled, and holds the pressure, and blows the salves among; or as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the wound is infected, it comes to the nurse while you are working, if it has a cloth or cotton that has been oiled with lavender oil, or in a small bottle of alcohol.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is not infected, it does not come to the nurse while you are working, if it has a plaster made of flour and baking powder, and incense powder, mixed with fresh eggs, then put on light sponges, and do not tie the wound; and if the wound is small, and it is broken into small pieces, if it is not necessary to remove the stitches, then cut the fringe, and the cure of things enchanting charms, and soothing, as if plasters and ointments are suitable for this; and if there is no wound on the limb, if the limb is cured with tents, and puts on needles, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not severe, and it does not break into pieces, but only slightly, and is not broken in two, but is bent slightly, if one knows, it can be straightened with slight force.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side of the jaw, to make the index of your left hand in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then make the index of your right hand on the fracture, straighten it slightly, and fix it with the other hand, and hold it in place.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is healed in two parts, and it is equal, then you must administer extension for two parts.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move or fracture, and they are pulled by a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place the broken lower jaw end on the cervical fracture, and place one double cloth on it; and place another double cloth on the long and wide part of the jaw according to its size, and tie it to the patient's neck, and order the patient to lie down, and give them light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, and it drifts to another place, and then put it back in its place; and apply plaster on it, with flour from a mortar or milled flax, after you have osteit the cervical fracture; and apply light plaster on it, and when it sets, do not change its position, leave it as it is until it is healthy; several times it will be healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If the abscess pus comes out, then it is best not to force what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a fracture and multiple wounds, a small piece of bone from the leg is removed; if the osteon has flexible joints, it can be easily replaced.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is wide, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have all the bones in place, and there is no pain, if the wound is wide, then make it large and put flexible bandages on it to support it until it heals.
de la forcele	Of the force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks more often in the direction of the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and separated into two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or it is broken with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the evacuation is when the break is in the direction of the wound, that you have two ministers, if the one touches the helper that feels the force of the break; and the other extends the col towards the part; then set the break in your two hands, so that it forms as it should, and there should be no appearance or difference.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you have further work to do, place the shoulder blade of the patient on the table with a round or flat object made of cloth or linen, depending on your need; and hold it gently but firmly in your hand so that you can even out the break.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not dare to cut the head of the force off, because it comes out too far, and place the shoulder blade on your ear or the other side, and hold the muscles of the shoulder blade with your hand as long as the bone of the force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture to your two, and if you manage to remove the fragments, then sell them; and take care to lighten the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any overhang, it is because the instrument is not strong enough to separate the facies: but make sure to use the right force on this instrument to avoid damaging the face.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and should be as wide as the bone desires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the hand; and if there are two heads, as you see, and some are large, and others are short, if it is the fracture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of the aposteme, if the wound is small, or you doubt the aposteme, if you use the wound with drapelz and tentes, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the abscess opens, if it is filled with oil of rose and vinegar and wine, and it is closed.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And the treatment of the bone is when it is painful and smaller than usual, and it is closed. Then take a large piece of powdered millnut and oak gall, and light sponges, and place a small ball at the end; then take a thin twist of three to four inches long and long, and wrap it around the bend; then place the twine on top of the sponges, so that the bend is held tight; then take a subtle twine of three to four inches long and long, and wind it around the bend while the bend is still tight; then turn the bend over the wrist, and tie the knot at the end of the bend, and soak the clean and sour salve, and soak the unsour salve; and remove the twine from each part, and when you see that the bend holds the wrist tightly, and you can clearly see that the twine does not move on the bone, and the restraint is tight; and make the mace lie on its side, and place it on the back of the mace, and lift the helper up when the patient falls asleep, or raise the shoulder to the collar, and do not dislocate the elbow or arm if it does not happen often, for at most 20 days; then resume the wrapping, if you see that it has value, and pull it and let it go as soon as it is restored; and it is restored in the most of 28 days, and in no fewer than any man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder bone breaks or becomes loose, and it does not fit well, and it is not due to touching; if the acromion follows the shape of the fracture, and the shoulder is reset according to its natural form, in all possible ways that you can; then powder the shoulder with a pound of mill with much butter, and light dusts, and place a wide and slender rod, a little wider than the shoulder, and if it fits well into any part of the shoulder, use linen threads to secure it; then tightly bind the rod all around, so that the rod does not move from its place, and look at the line each time it is loosened, and whenever it is loose, and if it is tightened, and places the rod back in its place, and rests the shoulder on the chest; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days, and when these numbers are completed, if it does not heal well, be sure, for this is not the only thing that needs to be lightly fixed.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	When a piece of bone is pushed forward, and there is no sound of breaking, if it is found, and the bone, and we do what we have said in the fracture of the force of easing abscess pain.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in the environment, but this often happens; but it breaks often at the joint.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken, if it is not in the right position, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of movement, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and open the chest in the broken bones, and it feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the restoration is when the patient has pain on their back, and places a cloth between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the chest in your hands, subtly putting them equal to all ways you can, as the bone appears to be according to what is desired; then puts on bandages and poultices around the wound, or another light one, and wraps it in a thin layer of salt or another light one, and wraps it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the tie back on itself, and tightens it evenly, and rewards each hour the lure, and if it becomes loose, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the wound, or pain or apoplexy, if you haste, and it becomes loose, and removes the bandage, and addresses what came from the ways of treatments; then reassembles the bandage, and tightens it as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Said that the breaking of the ribs does not come from pushing against the back, or at the head, and it does not bend much because they are curly; and it feels quite well in the investigation as should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restorations if you leave the break even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then place the splint, and draw it tight with a nail, if you have one.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is inclined at the chest, it feels very painful and sharp, like labor pains, because the chest does not stretch; and they take points, and all vomit great amounts of blood, and this is a great loss of health, and the ancients had put in great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is said that it should be administered meat that inflates the belly, by securing the girdle around the waist.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, that apostes does not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then the safe one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And no one says that they put ventsouces on the shoulder, for sweetening the form, and it seems right; however, doubt is that the ventouce does not attract the superfluities to the shoulder because of its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And no one says that they should cover the shoulder with fine oily cloth and put tents between the ribs to measure the liver's position, then cure the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured by the bone that points through the skin, and doubt arises in the patient, then it is necessary to cut along the broken costal bone, and put in an instrument to hold the face; and therefore it is necessary to fracture the bone, and make it light, and then cut the edges of the wound, if they are large, and dress them with plasters, as long as they are healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if abscesses come, then put on soft oiled cloths on the skin, and cover the wound; and treat while the skin of this that causes the abscess, and it is grown on the costal bone or where it must be, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the break of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never does a fracture come to the bones of the shoulder, and seldom does it happen that it cracks; and so to the spine bone.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to none, and you see whether it will be healthy or not, if you see that your hands are soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or stretch, and when you touch them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Dangerous that it is mortal in many cases, and if they are quiet and feel good when they are extracted and not stretched, dangerous that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if we put it in care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	1. And if something like that comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of the bones that are soft, and the accidents that are in hands, and then the back jumps and has ventilation and sensation of will; and when it is swallowed, it has ventilation and sensation of will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	2. And when it is swallowed and it sees that it is burning, if it can.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	3. If it is mortal: if it does not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	4. And if this accident does not come, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if the cure is that you reward if it has an abscess, then put on the oily rose or ointment of mustard until it is calmed; then put on a comfortable one and dry one, and tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep more than that part where you feel the pain, as long as you are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones are dislocated, then it is necessary to seize the head; and then the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound as much as possible in a straight line, then apply an ointment with turmeric, as long as it is healthy; and if the bones are broken, which are called the "bones of the elbow", put your left hand pocket in your right hand pouch, and pull out the plaster and tape, if you can; then tighten it, and if it has dislocated, then set it again, and if it has re-dislocated, then set it again, and cure the wound as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the break of the bone of the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the shinbone is broken, and if it is, then there has been no slight injury to the head; and it becomes long, and sinks into the gums, and pain comes to the knee, and swelling, and the broken part enlarges.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is when you extend your hand above it as much as possible while above the fracture site; and inspect which part is the break and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then place it in natural position as much as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or it descends to the dens, if I guide the physician on his belly, as long as the restoration of this fracture is not achieved.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed it even, if you put on the splint, then put on a fist or a hinge of flax or wire, and hold the fracture tight so that it does not move; and apply the leather to the ribs, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And order the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess ruptures and comes out, if it is not opened, as long as the ruptured abscess is calmed, and put on what we have mentioned before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it tight so that it can be done, if there are no other accidents; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is the bone that connects the upper arm to the shoulder blade, and if it is dislocated, then it must be reset according to one of the following two methods:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And the head of the shoulder is dislocated, and it is pulled back, and the patient's arm is held above the head; then the bone of the dislocated shoulder is pushed down until it reaches the elbow, and a small hinge is formed at the elbow, which can be bent in any direction or extended. Then the patient places their hands together, as the hinge returns to its original position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is if one dislocates the patient's shoulder due to their anger, and holds their hand on their collar, then commands the ministers that they trace the one that is at the joint of their hands, and the others trace it without exception in all parts, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then force the joint to move without exception in all parts of the breach, and extend each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the breach is near the shoulder blade, then it is necessary to place the joint on the middle of the shoulder, and the other on the elbow, so that when the breach is toward the elbow, and the shoulder blade, then place the breach, as you can, without labor, until the breach is equal at both places, and at both shoulders; then stretch the breach, as you can, and extract it, hold still without moving.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	When the shoulder becomes inflamed and does not improve within seven days, and if it is not relieved by applying a poultice of moist herbs and olive oil, then it is best to strain it; then extract it, and the manner of extracting it is as follows: if you place the plaster on the wrist, then assemble the arm with the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and then tighten the bandage, and extract it with the helper and with the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, and nothing else will dislodge it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	1. And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use these and place the incision on a larger and stronger needle than the others, and have one between each incision, and make sure each incision is as large as it can pass through the bone division three times; then draw out the needles, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more forcefully and less by moving them away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	1. And if you see the seat of the incisions and the bleeding, as we have said, in the part where you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess, if it leaves the bone alone for seven days, as we have said; then look at each of the three days' link, that pruritus does not swell or come to the head because the fistula does not come to the limb due to being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no accidents occur, but only if it is after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and then place the assistant's hand plainly on the line, and look at each hour during the night or morning, to see which part of the broken limb does not move, or is not softened by the flesh; if the address is due to the power of medicine, and the meat that we have before us, in such a way that the meat is subtle; and when it comes back to take, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	1. And it is customary that the helper and the leg should be re-taken in 40 days or more; therefore, one must gently and administer baths and medicines for ointments to the shoulder to improve it.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	2. And if the stricture is thick and blocked, it should be slowly unwrapped for 10 to 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	3. of the arm's fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	4. The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "forearm" or "ulna," and one of them is thinner, and it is the part that holds the pouch; and the other is thicker, and it is the part that is longer, by chance, towards the smaller one; in case of breaking only one of the thinner bones or the thicker one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the child's teeth are broken, the restorations are light, and the cures; and when the large ones are broken, it is the healing that is poor, and more painful than when they are broken individually.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the child's teeth that are broken, then it is sufficient to extend lightly and put equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large teeth that are broken, then it should be tightened more strongly; and extend it over the thumb, and raise the palm of the other hand, and the teeth should be lower than the others, and let the mouth rest on its own cheek, and the thumbs raised in front of the other hand, or at the elbow, and some other parts on the opposite side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then he places the head in its place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, he puts each in its place, and if there are no loose pieces that point the way, and you cannot restore it to its place, then follow our advice and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I speak to the single cauterist; if he takes care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoration there are gapes, and they are made of oil rose and black wax, neither too hard nor too soft, nor too thick; and they are draped subtly, as long as the gapes are pacified.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then take the cautery, and put the powder of the mill with a lot of urine on it, then make the holes, and let the wheat be larger than the others; and see if there are VI holes or arms in more positions: whether the wheat is in one of the bones, or in two; and draw it more under the wheat that is further away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the corners be that are under the wheat be wet and moist, and not too hard or rough; and let the string, which is drawn, be linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accidents come to the member, if it is like pricking to the member, if you heat the member with hot water as much as necessary until the pricking is relieved; and let the member rest in its place.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the stretching, and if the limb is softened and the bones are exposed, and it seems like something, if it is alleviated.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the knots do not come to the member because it is too tight, for which reason you must loosen it as soon as possible, and let some time pass until the knots are untied, and then stretch it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things come to the patient's aid within twenty years, it is not good.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the dislocation is not corrected within thirty years, it becomes permanent; however, if it is corrected within thirty-five years or even in twenty years, depending on the composition and complexion of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the hand dislocation
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It is said that on the back of the hand and in the wrist there are few dislocations, and only sprains many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And if the wrist of the hand is broken or sprained, it is said that the patient should lie down and straighten his arm in front of him evenly; then place his hand on the extended thigh, extend the broken bones, and put the fingers in their places as they are well joined; then apply plaster and bandages, if necessary, then wrap it according to the size of the leg; and then wrap it in a drape made of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the cut is at the back of the abdomen, near the sole of the foot, I make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to scratch at the broken part; then I stretch out a long thread, and it should be as large as the sole of the foot, and I stretch it, as one does.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the cut is on the back of the hand, then it comes to pass that you put a bandage over it, and another under it, if the wrist is straight and in line, then the thumb turns inward between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the cut is not on either of the two, if they are closed, then it comes to pass that you put them in line, and if you see that you can raise the cut with the plantar, and if you look at the thumb, which is raised, and does not move; and if the cut is on other fingers, if it is on the index or one of the others, if it is closed, and the thumb is raised with the healthy one that follows; or you tie them all together, as much as you can, or you put a bandage over it, as one does; and take care in restoration and in the position of the wound, and cut what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the joint is often broken in two places, and it can be seen when it turns front and back; the restoration is if it lies on the line of the fracture, and the other side is dislocated.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient groans when it is their turn, then extends each of the muscles that connect to the bone in its proper place; and this is when the fracture occurs.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the joint, then some of the ligaments turn towards the point of pain, and the others turn away from the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And as it has come to the joint, and therefore the ligaments of the joint should be released, and the extension should be equal; then place the bone in its proper position with your hands, according to its natural figure, and then apply the splint, and the bandage, and do not let it move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has been strained, and you let it rest, then return to your care and your home; the bandage is made in a certain way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap it around the ankle, doubled in two or three, and remove any excess, then bend the leg until the heel reaches the root of the nail, and tie the long end between the thigh and the leg, releasing the ankle joint; then bend the leg and the thigh the bandage, then put on the brace and one on the bone of the leg; then place the leather between the leg and the thigh to put the strain in its proper position, and begin to tie three or four turns on the brace; and as more you use the brace, and less it is tightened; then take out the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and the three or four turns that are on the brace, then return to the ankle joint and see if it is still tight; the strain, if it does not move from its place, then let it go, then leave it, then it will not apostheme nor enflame nor any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it does not respond, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if it has pieces of bone that prick, if possible, and it can; and if it cannot, then it is necessary to cut the limb, and drain it; and the cure, as we have said, depending on how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the joint broken when one puts it in place, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made afterward, it does not clash with the patient's pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	You should know that the joint is restored in L days, or less or more, according to the differences in complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the rule of the right knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the right knee joint there is little breaking, but it cracks many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, whether it is only a scratch or a puncture, and all the wounds appear, and they feel painful, and this is not good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put back what has been lost on both sides as much as possible, and then the template is placed, and an adjusted nail is inserted, if you have the skill, and it is tightened as it should be, then all the adjustments we have made for other fractures are rewarded, such as a broken hip and other similar appearances; if you put back what is necessary for each accident, as much as possible, then it will be healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	There are two bones in the leg, and some are called "true" by right, not "weasel," and the others are called "foscile." And all fractures are like that of the arm, and for this the restoration is done in the same way as that of the arm. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, then it causes great pain and one sees well; then turn away.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Adonques, ensure proper extension and align it evenly; however, be aware that the fracture may be uneven, and there may be more pieces, which will make the extension less severe and lighter. Follow your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your incision, if you take two strips of twisted hair that prick the leg on both sides and are long enough to reach from the knee to the ankle, then wrap them around the leg and tie them at both ends, and place the end of the strip under the joint and tie it there, and do not allow the leg to deviate to the side or the other, and it is well; and no one has caused pain in the leg, and it was made of twisted hair, and you put it on to prevent movement, and properly made it in the fracture or wound; and move each leg every day to see if there is any swelling or other accident; if the cure is as healthy as possible.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot never break, and they must be very hard to break, and have only been broken in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see the bones slipping over each other, if they are so hard pressed against the ground, just as if they were flying, then now place your foot on the other leg, lift the one that is broken, press it as much as it will become in its place; then place the splint and stitch it, and cut the belly of the foot a little table at the ankle, then draw it up to the knee, then wrap the cloth around, and other things that you have skill for.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, you will find the bones unevenly broken and dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are two fractures, if they heal, then as we have said, you must use the other hand; then place a splint on the longer of the two, and make it slightly larger, then place the pin in the wound that I mentioned, and tighten the strap; and if there are II or III, or more, fractures, if you place one on each, according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and draw the strap tight around the pin; and make sure that the head of the splint is positioned against the abdomen of the wound, so that it fits well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not overlook the other things I have said for other injuries, as soon as we have said them; and attend to each accident as we have said.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the shoulder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the woman's shoulder bone is broken, if it is made to be large, then it bends towards the side of the shoulder, and is held by the side; then fill the nature of the woman with cloth, and put it in as much as possible; then lift the woman's shoulder, and gently bend the back a little at a time, and when it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns with the cloth, if she sees blood, if the cloth is saturated, re-insert it, and make seven turns or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see, take a bucket of herbs, and tie a cord to the mouth, and blow all the bucket into the nature; then let the cord be exhaled from the nature: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it alone for some time until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the elbow is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the elbow of the hawk; and these breaks are not hidden that much from the one who studies and uses it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means in more ways the right way of restoration: understand the dough.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the same way, when it is broken, take an ostrich gullet and bite the limb; then wrap it with drapes, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be cured quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, just as it is large, if it is like the bone of the shoulder or elbow, or seems so, that it is now healthy, if the wounds that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is, if the inflammation of vitrol increases, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the fracture at the same hour, or the next day, if the swelling does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the swelling increases and comes out, if you leave the restoration for the next day, as long as the inflammation is calmed, and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause bad luck to come.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken, it should be set as soon as possible, so that you can gently place it at your fingertips, in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if you cannot easily extend the bone, use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight feet long, and its size corresponds to the size of the wound; for this reason, it is necessary to make three or four cuts, according to the number of cuts needed in each case of fracture; it should be sharp and large, so that it does not tear at the compression of the member on your thumb, and should be larger in front, and large in the environment in front.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "bandage", because it is necessary that the heads of the bones be placed on the top of the bone; and it should be once, as soon as it rises, and be even on one side of the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight, and the splints cannot hold the bone well, then it comes that you cover the top of the bone with the splint, as long as the splints are in place.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you do not return the bone to its place, as we have said, if it is covered with an instrument that is suitable for this, or cutting and sharp, then you should use this tool that has been removed from the hard parts and small scratches in the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, be advised that it is not natural in its original state.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you work on it until it is in its original position, then wrap it in a strip of black vinegar cloth, and do it properly as such; and do not put anything on the wound or elsewhere that has oil, so that it does not become infected and corrupted; then after restoring the bone, administer remedies as you see fit, and leave the wound exposed, covering it completely according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not tightened with the fracture; and many times have I seen this work well, and have caused the patient to come out of the pain or die or corrode never; and so the scars are more moist and softer than the other scars.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is large or severe, and you doubt that it will come to harm as we have said, but if there is pain in the limb, then do not tighten too much; instead, wrap it loosely, around the limb, hard knots, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after I or II days that the wound has healed completely, and if all you have used is the remedy on the wound, and you use a salve for painful wounds, like a medicinal ointment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to unwrap the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is tight and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limb be aligned in a way that the belly is covered lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to press, and it cannot be fastened but pulled away from the belly, with small pieces of bones, because it can cause the wound to open, and all these pieces that bring about this pain, you must treat them with care.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if the fistula comes to the hip, or in another way of corruption, and you must treat it according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed through the limb, as if it were the bone of the elbow or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if you do not treat it, because often it dies; by chance it may heal after 20 or 30 years, and then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of the blisters that come out with heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come often after the healing of the wound, moreover when it is near the joint, and one must see the figure of the member; and by chance it cannot make the members its natural way.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the wound is fresh: if it is treated with warming medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and other similar things, whether you use any of these or all together, and mix them with warming ointment or with an excess of urine or with vinegar; and then apply them to the wound in poultices, and draw them out well, and do not let them drop from your hands; and then draw them out again, and continue another one as long as the swelling remains; or you draw out a piece of plaster well made; for the property of the plaster is that it all presses together all the flaps of the members; and if the swelling has already become hard like a piercing, and it is sore to the bone, if the raseur is put on, and the superfluity is removed; or you leave it without any raseur, as long as it is sore, and the cure as long as it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A limb that is weak after imprisonment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and weakens after the weak limbs and subtly, if it happens for various reasons: either because the one was too tightly bound, and was not well tied; or because it received too many stitches, and could not come to the nails at the member; or due to multiple swelling; or because there were too many movements, not in its time; or because it had little blood in its heart, and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is if you make the patient lie on his back and tighten the cloth around him as much as possible so that there are no multiplications in him; then give him a bath, and he will feel relieved and relaxed; then put powder on the limb, if it attracts the great swelling, and the inflammation often comes from the knee; and revive to his natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A dislocated limb after the healing process
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is swollen after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the disfigured limb is crooked, it does not resemble its natural shape: if one does not believe the folk who say that the bone must be broken all at once, and most of them have done this in our land; and these bones are blamed, and great harm comes to them, and by chance they die; however, if the wounds and tortures are fresh, and if they are washed with hot water or herbs that are mollified, as if they were made of viscous substance, or roots, and honey, and similar things; and I apply a mollifying ointment, as if it were well made, and I take the viscous substance of vismalve, and cook it with animal fat or olive oil, and apply it thusly; or I take fat figs, and roast them with fish sauce, and similar medicines that dry the sweat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is there where the node does not occur due to continuous and long pressure with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb at any hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is aroused and made painful, as well as the incision, and it is necessary to use iron on the bone, if it comes close to the bone, with a subtle and light cut; and then rest and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sense to the target.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay, if we read it, and by chance if we reset it on the shoulder; because no one can move the joint when it is inflamed: many times brought pain and other aches: always, when this happens, I make the patient healthier with ointment and then let him, as long as the abscess is healed, apply warm oil and oil to the limb, then reset it lightly, and cure each limb as we have cured it in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the surgeons for the dislocation of the shoulder joints.
des mandibules	for the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are times when the mandibles are dislocated, and the dislocations of both are in two ways: either they are a small piece of their bones, and become soft; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth that cannot hold it, and cannot close the mouth, and wrap around the tongue with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it returns through more positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	1. If it is complete and accomplished, if you reset it as soon as possible, and without force; in such a way that the master of the assistant marks the chief of the patient's shoulder, and bites the tip of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible which covers the mouth, if it is dislocated by 2 parts; and the other two hands are deformed, to be equal; and command the patient to smooth his jawbones, his mandibles, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	2. And the teeth are set in their place, as they should be in his jaw.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	If the dislocation is returned to its place, it should be done gently, just as it is the two mandibles together, if the hot and oily drips do not cause any harm; do not force too hard when returning it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	If the dislocation is returned to its place correctly, and the patient's mouth feels relieved, then apply soft cotton fluff made of olive oil and wax gently around the mouth; let the patient lie on his back, and keep his head between his knees so that he does not move to the left or right, and do not force himself to vomit, but chew gently as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws; then take what has been gently applied and do not try to open the mouth with your fingers and drink, as long as the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be set in place within an hour and are not converted to their original position, and if fever and customary aches come, and by chance a solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting of clear water.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, you will know that it is a disaster; and many have died in nine years.
de la forcelle	of force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be overcome by the cost of continuing the effort and the pain, and it is never unstable at the end, but it is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is when the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; then press your palm against the shoulder, it will return; then place the splint and bandage, and tighten; and the part that is towards the elbow cannot be dislocated, not even if it is not stable once, and if it does not become unstable again, as we have said; then place the splint and bandage, and tighten, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy; and then, when the head of the shoulder is dislocated, bring the children back to their mother as soon as the shoulder is in its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder is dislocated: either it is dislocated at the head of the humerus bone at the shoulder socket; or it is dislocated at the top of the shoulder blade; or it is dislocated at the side, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate the arm, nor does it dislocate the nerves; and more often it dislocates towards the shoulder socket, especially for those who have little strength, because they fall greatly; for those who have enough strength, it falls with a few steps, and returns with a few steps.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they are struck or cut, and the muscle of their arm is torn away from the shoulder, and make sure it is not dislocated.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And know the dislocations when they are towards the axis, and make a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and from there to the head of the shoulder, as if it were some ones; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, and make no movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you can see it manifestly at the head; and this way of dislocation is not hard to restore, when it is new, or if the muscle is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the minister lightly places his hand on the shoulder of the sick person, then takes your hands and extends them upwards, placing them apart; he lightly applies pressure to the joint at the top of the shoulder; he then removes his hand and extends it upwards, putting it aside; if he comes hastily.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands just after, if the patient is to be bathed in hot water; and he is gently relaxed and soothed, as with a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in hot water, and is relaxed; then he is lowered on his back, and one place his hand on the shoulder of the patient, not too soft nor too hard, then places his foot on the hand of the patient's sole, and lightly holds the shoulder girdle, and draws the hand of the minister; and other ministers trace the shoulder girdle, if it does not move; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that it is held in this manner: and that you cause the present home to be greater than the shoulders; and that it is turned towards the chest, and bend the shoulder away from the shoulder of the patient, and hold the shoulder up, so that the shoulder hangs down in the armpit; and other ministers trace the hand of the patient towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, if there is nothing heavy for them to bear with it, the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reduction is also done in another way: and it is like this: the shoulder is placed as if it were a pilaster, and it is not too thick or too rough; then it is put back into the patient's shoulder, but if it has slipped out too far, and the shoulder is too long, then the hand is formed on the other side, and the joint returns to its place in the arm; and if it does not return after all these things that we have said, then this treatment must be followed: take two shoulder bones of large size and four of wide size, which have the head entered from the front of the shoulder, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the wrist is loosened and tied, that it may not catch the maid's hand, then place the bandage around the maid's wrist; and extend some of the arms over the long wrist, and the helper over the shoulder of the arm, then put the arm over I eschilon of a large shield, and extend the hands on the other side, and let the chest hang down from another part: the joint is now relieved.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in whatever way that may be, if you find that you must place the bandage a spider's thread equal, then place the powdered flour dust with incense and wool of oven all over the shoulder and chest, then tighten the knot around the bandage again, and turn the cord on the powder, and tie the hand on the arm, and let the hands remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	1. It is necessary that he drink little at first, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster; then gradually increase after the first four or seven days, and move it; and if it is tight and does not soften, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	2. If the joint is tight due to moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is placed in front of or in the chapter of cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	3. If you do all this, and after seven weeks, the joint still does not hold and cannot raise the arm forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened; and suspect that the joint will never fit in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first line of the text translates to: "The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the ankles, or knees, if it is made by impulse and extension of hands, and it is treated another time; and cure until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the cure comes pain in the member, and then movement, if the patient uses cold water many times, as long as that pain is not alleviated, and then it should return to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dear dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that when the stiff joint is dislocated, it repeatedly returns to its place, and all parts are dislocated; and it becomes dislocated from front to back, and the dislocations are not well rejoined, as they can be seen and felt; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	When you join the male member with your hand, if you see it open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is weak, and cannot grip the arm, nor touch the shoulder with anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it always with the help of a lever, because if it is not reset, it will be painful to return; and by chance it cannot be returned at all, even when it is in place; rather than other dislocations, it is more painful, and by chance it can cause death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is if it is, when it can be returned, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms are expanded, and his hands are stretched according to the thigh, from the thigh to the wrist, and bind the joint with your fingers or at the base of the palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand on its hand, and boasts of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not return to the shoulder, then apply strong extension; and if two hands extend the arm, and hold it with two hands, so that it does not move at extension, then turn the arm in each part, then make a double strip long and wide; and when you touch the joint of the joint with your hand, if no oil greases the joint, then form the joint's ends, as it revives; and when it is at the shoulder, put dry cloth with olive oil on it on the back of the malady, and straighten it, and let the arm be at the collar of the malady, and leave some jaws, then let it go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	When the joint is tightly closed in its place, if it feels loose, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then repeat the application and the ligature, and leave it for some time until it is firmly fixed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the joint is separated and it becomes tight, if it is bathed and rubbed gently, and pressed until it is calmed; or you put a layer of fat sheep wool on the joint, then leave it for one night and one day, then the bone, and let it enter or bathe; and when it is dry, remove the wool from the joint, and then enter or bathe twice or three times until it is healthy; and if you see, if you put a layer of damp wool on and heat it with a fire, and press it; if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The first sentence to translate is "li dislocation de la main".
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The second sentence to translate is "Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’elle est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you place the forced hand on a table, extend the fingers, and measure it, if it places its palm on the appearance of the joint, and the thumb as far as it can reach; then you must see if it is well placed; then place the forced hand on the back of your hand on a table with extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the forced hand on the back of your hand on a table, and measure if your hand is placed on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well; if not, then the pain of the strain apostemes apostemes chaus should ease, and let you continue.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it on the patient after some time, if the joint becomes torn; and does not doubt that as long as the hands are swollen, and cannot hold anything at all: then you should know whether the nerves are affected, or the artery; if there is no other means than cauterization in this case, and by chance it is no other thing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are on the patient, if you apply the tool we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for some time, then remove and leave it alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no inflammation, if the wet heat, and rub it as much as it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the two hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never have both hands been dislocated at the same time, either at the back of the palm or in the abdomen; therefore, they are held, and the dislocation is reduced as much as possible, then the chief of the dislocated hand is held in place, and it is moved to the part where it was dislocated; and it is left alone, and then it is adjusted to the joint, and as we have said, if it is dislocated at the wrist, and it is moved, and it is tied again, and this is done frequently until it is tight, and if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and it is tied in the same way as before, until it is safe; and this is also done when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The first sentence to translate is: "dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or collarbone is dislocated, or if there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, because the patient dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the patient jumps and cannot hold it, and many times the limbs are softened, or the hips or arm or elbow, or the eschinee is silent for IV parts; this which is silent at the back is called "gibbosity": the cure is that you reward if the gibbosity has come from childhood: if there is no care or sanitation at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from chewing or percussions or similar things, they say the old ways of cures by long words, but I have abbreviated according to my intention and formed stirrups in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbosite (gout) that comes before, there is no genius or health; and also that which comes directly in the second coste (shoulder), and cannot be cured except for the one that comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the malaide (patient) extends his face evenly on the left side, and has no strain on him, so that he does not bend; then form the tison (bandage) in the head on the earth, and the other as piez (piece), and tie one line through the malaide's assaults, and the other as hainches (laces), and as chevilles (threads); and two ministers close the lines, the one at the head and the other as piez, among the II tisons (joints); and they should be well closed, the tison as we have said, and the mires (nurses) put their hands on the spine form, as it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, then take a third finger of the long arm, cut off the nail, and the patient should be in costé, and cut the head of the thumb off at the nail, then put the meat of the thumb on the spine; and put the eyes of the thumb on the other end of the thumb, and press well, until it returns to the leu; and if you see, then do the same for the tornet that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is it that you have two tisons at the head of the patient's long arm, and divide them into two parts, and between each tison, there should be a thumb of length; and in each tison there should be a pertus, or the tornet turns, and the tisons should be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each tison there should be a tison turning, even if the tornets turn, and there should be two thumbs of length at each turning of the tornets to turn the tornet; and then take the lien that is among the bars of the tornet towards the head, and the other lien towards the eyes of the other tornet, and each of the ministers turns their tornet according to the lien, and the masters put the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When the joint is equalized, if it is moistened with a drying powder with abundance of urine, and then washed, and then applied with a tablet of III doses, which darkens the healthy part of the gilbosite and the healthy part of the spondile, then it is tied with a string as we have said, and subtle remedies for necrosis are used until it is healthy; and if nothing comes of the health in the end, it comes to administer analgesics and anesthetics with the tablet we have mentioned before; and never once does one administer a piece of plaster, and never once does one come to appear at the back of the spine of the patient, and take care that this is not dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, because one must not presume to have it: by chance it might come to death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The shoulder joint and the shoulder blade joint are only dislocations, unlike other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four parts: front and back, and left and right; and more front, and less back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of shoulder dislocation is that when the bad leg is joint with the good one, it is longer and more open, and the bad knee is larger than the good one, and it cannot double its kneecap in fire; and it is the one that is stretched due to abscess chafing, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	The sign of him who comes to defecate, if this accident is contrary to these provisions,
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	The sign of him who comes to the front, if it is that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the genital area with pain, and if you see it happen before, and hold his urine, and cleanse the anus, and when he goes, if it passes through the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	The sign of him who comes to the rear, if it is that he cannot expand his genital area, and double, and that this leg is more bent than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is lifted up against the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The first sentence to translate is: "Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covenant mie qu’il ait presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, there are four ways of resetting it, if you manage to return the joint, and make it flexible and firm, and move to the left and right; by chance if it returns, and there is no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then it may be necessary to use strong force and bend the leg strongly with two hands or one hand; and other ministers extend their hand in this manner that they let their hands drop from their elbows, then they pull on the other end until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and hold steady while.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in IV instances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not work, it is necessary to apply treatment to the limb If the dislocation occurs in the jaw, it is necessary to place the assistant's hand on the healthy side of the jaw, then tie the ligature on the root of the tooth, and the other hand that is loosely grasped, then tie the ligature higher towards the forceps; then apply other measures to the assistant's arms, and wrap the largest muscle of the jaw with the ligature, and extend it around the teeth: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is gentler than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	1. And if you do not hold the shoulder in this manner that we have said, then it comes to pass that you feel the two feet of the maimed person assembled at a very tight ligature on the two ankles, and on the two thighs, and that the maimed leg is extended two times more than the other; then it is hung suspended from the head of a post, and is suspended from the earth with two arms; then command the minister to embrace the head of the chest, and have other ministers hanging with the maimed person, who embrace form the chest, for the joint now returns in its place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	2. And when the dislocation is at its worst, if the maimed person feels it, as we have said in the one who has gilbositeit, and draws the ligature on the maimed leg properly, and on the foot also; then tie the strips, the head and the other as feet, then place the strip between the thighs of the maimed person in its form; and have the cloth moistened around it so that it does not hurt the maimed person, then extend each minister towards him, and hold the dislocation in your hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place the splint as we have described in the gilt-post, and press it firmly as we have said, and guide the maidens on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it comes to extend the maiden's leg as we have said; and then put the mirror on her pain on the other hand, and pull it towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the groin, and it cannot be extended forward as we have said; and then lift up the maiden's leg, and extend it as we have said before, and press on the joint to the table; and it will be when the maiden extends her legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the splints, and place the mirror, and pull with a bend, if the maiden does not move; and rest for III or IIII, then release, and place the mirror on; and if you see that they are equal, if the stretch, then III or IIII, then release, and let the member go as far as it is comfortable, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should not be pulled upwards or to the side, but only forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If you command the patient to bend their knee towards their thigh, and it does not move towards their thigh, it indicates that the shoulder is dislocated; the restoration of all this is if you make the patient lie straight, extend the leg if possible, put your back on theirs, and put your hand on their shoulder; then take your shoulder with your thumbs, and pull between your two fingers, and bend the two bones that form the shoulder; then other assistants extend the knee as much as the shoulder returns to its place, and the signs are that the leg is gently held in place by the thigh; then apply plaster, and make the leg aerate at the thigh, and the fingers come together strongly three or four times, then remove it; and do not move the patient's arm for as long as the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not pointed, if extension is given with great force, as we have said in the treatment of the bowstring, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never fully dislocated, and it is bent and twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is if the ankle is swollen, and it should be checked before the part where it is dislocated: the fingers are light, and it should be gently stretched with the hands as it is only weak.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, if the ankle is checked before the part where it is dislocated: the fingers are light, and it should be gently stretched with the hands as it is only weak. Then seat the patient on the right side, and with the left hand pull the leg towards you; then take the knee in your right hand, and then in the left twice, and raise it up, and hold it well at the top of the knee; and do this twice, if we have said, by bending and raising the knee; if it returns, it is well; if not, if it does not return, repeat the treatment, as it will return; and if it cannot return again, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and keep the knee firmly on the ground between the thighs, and let it dangle freely, so that the knee does not bend; then mark the ministers with the knee, and some others extend the dislocation to the hands or the leg, where the knee is located; then stretch them equally, and the passus should be held between the knees to hold the knee; then put the dislocation in your hands, and mark the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it reaches the point, if he applies plaster and allows it to dry, and forms the bandage, and ties it to the leg, and covers the nerves that are near the ankle bone, where the laces are too tight; then he leaves it on for II to III days, and if it remains tight, then it should be loosened; then he removes it at the end of the third or fourth day, and applies a new one every four days; and if it still does not improve, it is better to seek medical attention immediately.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound becomes inflamed and comes, then it is necessary to calm it down if possible, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	Of two kinds
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When they are dislocated, if they can be extended gently and easily, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no doubt or pain, then you should make the patient lie on his back or side, and place your hand on the joints, then press with your thumb until it pops; and when it is reduced, and it does not pop, then place the heel of your hand on the top of the knee, and press firmly, and hold for three seconds, and then release; and let him rest, until he is safe.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your cure, if you are not unskilled or merciful and slow, and if you are pitiful, do not be presumptuous; and use at the beginning of things soothing remedies for boils, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to the shoulder, and if the boil is coming out, and the skin is dry, and the wound is healing, and the pain is less, and the bones are not broken, do what we have said in simple diseases; and do not enter into a way of despairing, according to what we have said, for this is according to your Creator's will, and for the knowledge of your heart and courage.
Amen	1. For the fire c
