O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fullness of it, and have finished for its exposings and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my vision that I have fulfilled this with the cauterization, which is from hands' work, and it means "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is despised by all, if it is perished in the science and knowledge, and there is nothing left of the former that was written in books by the ancients, which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to think that I can revive this by putting the ordination of this cauterization according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will put together the forms of the fire-burning tools and other instruments of the work with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is their craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of parts, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, teeth, and hairs, and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the limbs, and the issue of the same.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iocras says that the non and the evil are not with it, and with the hand is little; and at the same time in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that who are not acquainted with things before said, if they go, they may err and mislead men; and I have often seen these who fall into this science and abandon the science and sense of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a foolish man who cuts off my aposteme of scrophules or the col of a woman, and cuts the arteries of the col; for so much blood issues out that the woman dies in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see if another man who treated a piercing on a young man, the piercing was large; if it was taken out with a piece of the bladder, and he died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been accused of the treatment, and see the position of the patient and the size of the piercing, and if it was well that it was cut, he died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see if another man who cured the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the splint on the wound; and the patients were ignorant and forced the fracture over the wound as soon as possible, and did not leave any mark on the wound, and left it eventually; and he commanded that it should not be removed; and later, when the leg was completely swollen and the wound was healed, it came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am summoned to go to him, and I hurry to come and relieve his leg; and when I see it dislocated if it is in pain and does not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, all paths of the corrupted member were already confirmed or damaged, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And then another measure that would collapse the enchantment and then inflame due to the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For gangrene, when it is free of melancholic matter, only then does one dare to touch it with iron if it is not in its part of the limb that can be completely healed what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	1. Therefore, thrice-wrought threads, you should know that handwork is divided into two parts: it is skill, whether or not there is danger in other arrangements; and I will show each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	1. Therefore, keep your hands safe so that they cannot be spoken ill of if you take up arms and armor lightly and firmly, and use the best way possible for the grace of God to come to your help and be strong; and let the unwholesome diseases of grief be healed; and guard your weapons from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come out of this world with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	The Galenic doctors advise: "Do not take medicine for your illness, lest you become worse.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have found this treatment described in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and hot medicine cauteries, and it is the first chapter of the book from the chief to the feet; as well as the forms of strangulation, and of making incisions, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered and the forms of strangulation.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered by the loins' joints and the forms of the straps.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, let us remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the help and not harm to each complexity.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the help and not harm is the longest word and subtle science and the secret remedy; and for this they speak more of the wounds, and agree on this; and they are short in their words because I do not trust the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally with all complexions or matter, for whatever the complexion: it is to know complexion hot in matter, and complexion dry in matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion, all matter is dissolved, and they say that cauterization is of no help; and the other says the opposite: that cauterization is only useful for diseases that come from choler and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be curing hot diseases by choler, or for dryness; and those who say the opposite that cauterization helps greatly with hot diseases that come from the heart of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the chest of the patient and the heat to be on fire, you must cool the chest.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I concur with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, it does not interfere with anything except those who have experienced it and know the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their seizures and spasms; other complexions do not have our pain, however, in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they are ordered to resemble and correspond to the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization with fire is the secret of many remedies, and above all, it is a burning remedy.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it only harms the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members in the slightest.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning remedies come from one member to another by removing, and bring the maladies of grief to health; and by chance the patient Li feus for its highness and for the goodness of its substance does not harm, if it has no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my experiments and through the long service and study I have given to this art, and it is true; and for this I apologize for the length of the words, as I only want to reveal the secret that is inside or fire, and the quality of the work, as it treats the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstrating; and receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Know, son, that the cauters should be made in such a way that they fit well and are not too tight.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	1. I say that the cauter is usable in all sizes because the wounds are not misplaced by the help of the cauter; and likewise, if the cauter is for necessary pains and hastans that cannot wait for the size that greatest malice does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think that the fire cautery is harmful to the patient; for the disease that is cured by fire cautery has no return; and he tells him thus, but it is not so if he cares, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion and seizes the humors that cause pain, and is as good as medicine for hastening one's valor, and for one's virtue in one's work and signory.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease never returns according to the complexion of the patient and the lesion of the disease, and they are assembled in him by the acquisition of meat and other things, unless cauterization is administered to him or he has little excess and moisture, as for cauterization of deniers for pain, and the other things, and only some pain does not return; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	1. And many people do not understand why cauterization is called surgery by others, but it is seen; however, they only believe that cauterization is after medicine, but we understand it is false, and it is cauterization by surgery because when we administer remedies for any disease and they are not effective, then we apply cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	2. Therefore, it is well that cauterization is called surgery after medicine, but not according to the attention of the foolish.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	3. The ancients said that a golden cauterization instrument was as cruel as iron, and they said this because of the quality of the gold and its high substance; and they said that the golden cauterization did not cause any harm, but it is true because I have experienced it, and I found that it is true in some men; and golden cauterization is as cruel as iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	When you hold the gold instrument, you do not know when it is heated by the color of gold and has cooled down; and if it is heated too much, it melts; then it is enough to prevent it.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that's why we use fire cautery in our work, as we have found it to be effective.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or if you have commanded this chapter of the louse and flea bites, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Olive oil cautery is used for moisture and cold in lice and fleas, and when it is done for the cause of a disease called "soda," and for many humors that descend from the head to the ears, eyes, and jaw, and for numerous sleeplessness, toothache, and gum pain, and for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and semblances of diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is if the patient is purged by a solvent medicine altering the third or fourth nut, according to which virtue and age and accustomed practice of the patient can endure; then repeat the dose for the patient's shoulder.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place the palm of your hand between the roots of his palms between his two fingers; then if you have two means, if he bleeds, apply the olive oil which is called "olive" and is in this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply ink to the joint, and descend and stretch your hand little by little, then loosen your hand, and reward the joint if you see the bone move slightly; and if you do not see it, continue the cauterization as long as you see the bone as I have told you; then take a piece of cloth, and soft cotton wool, and put it on the joint, and let it stay for three days; then apply moisturizing ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said to the elder, that the more overgrown the wound is, the more it discharges; and for this reason, it helps to alleviate.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that too much hair should be cut off if part of the bone is also removed, and then remove what is bone from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the cautery should be shaved as much as possible, and it must not be forced if it is large like the vertilus that women put in their wounds because the humors flow outside; and it must be shaved for a long time overgrown; afterward it must be treated and soothed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauterization do not seem less effective in general, regardless of whether or not one has fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them alone, as the head of the shoulder is often weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we have seen in other parts of the body; and even when the patient's strength is naturally weak, the first appearance of cauterization seems more salving and less painful to me, and I therefore use them accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	1. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	1. When the entire head is in chronic pain and lasts for a long time, if it must be used by the patient with pills and powders called "cochies," and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and when the cauterization is made as we have said before, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	The patient's head is severely injured, and it cannot be moved; therefore, we cauterize a small part of it as we have mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each corne of the head, as we have previously described, and then cauterizing the part called "vassels" or veins; it is placed in a vacuum; and tie your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will explain further; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the corne be more subtle than those of the head's main vein, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	2. For in one part of the fire cautery, there is sudden pain, and it spreads throughout the body, and the head is purged with medicines that change the oil, and all the other cures I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of them profit: therefore, I performed cauterizations in two ways, which is to say, with hot and dry medicine.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	3. If you apply hot and dry medicine to the cauterization, and it burns and causes the skin to peel and crust over, then make a temple out of the part where the pain is held in place so that you can pour in the plaster of Paris; and when it has been poured, let the lie and press it well and leave it for 12 hours; then remove it and apply the plaster of Paris, leaving the wound for 2 or 3 days; then make a cutting into the bursar as far as it presses in.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of ointment as soon as it is healed; and if you see that there are no such medicines as I have written or dose treated of medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cauterization if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterization of here is its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a ring or has a small opening, and it is placed on the painful part, and hold the hand and lightly press the iron on the half of the circumference that is not hot, until the artery is cold, then relieve your hand that the artery is calm, and there is abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After wrapping the leg with linen, and then with thread, and then moistening it with butter, and then treating the wound with ointment as much as it is healthy; and if you return to cauterize this embolism with the cautery called "cultellare" at all points, and do not cover the artery in this embolism that is not enough.
de emigraine	of embolism
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an embolism as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and do not profit, and see that the cauterization does not help with the medicine and force, therefore it is necessary that you sharpen the cautery called "cultellare" as much as it is white; and then make a line of half a dozen of turns on the leg, and hold your hand once, and pull it so that you do not cover the artery and do not strain the bone; and cut the gum that is quiet when you cut, and the nerves only have quietness and spasmus does not come to the patient, and cut the artery where it is coated, or coated has great pain and immediately to the one who did not know, and who is not studied and practiced; and leave the wound in its place; but I will tell you how to relieve pain when the artery is coated, and I will show you where it is burned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	1. And if you see that this cauterization does not relieve the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the wound as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization or the chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterization that has been made; and this cauterization is better than the other.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	1. for the pain of the ears from too much cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	1. When pain comes to the ear from too much cold, and it is heard over medicines in liquid form and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pain does not stop, then wash this cauterization, called "points", with which the form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, draw all around the patient's ear, or around both ears if one hurts, and dig a little into the root of the ear because you have felt the lobe; then make a cut on either side of each ear; afterwards, cure the lobe as much as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with cauterization is those that move due to fever, as we have said in divisions of the disease; and do not make cauterization like those that come from scabies and pimples.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is caused by the smell of dregs and excretions from the mouth and gargle, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three caustics: one at the root of the ear, and another in the temple, and the third in the joint of the two lips; and place the cauterization in the part that naturally opens, and make the cauterization in the ear so that the tip of the ear is opposite the corner of the eye, and in the temple as far as one nose; and leave the cauterization as long as it does not hurt half of it; and this is the shape of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The appearance of the dislocation we have shown is similar, but it is more subtle and requires that the cut be slightly larger; after treating the patient as I have said, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy occurs and is treated as we have described, and there is no fever, and the patient does not have a fever, I make four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one on the forehead, and one on the lip that is called "gaskins" as we have said before, and then cauterize on the mouth of the stomach; and treat as we have said before.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of drugs and modify the brain; after that, the physician removes the head of the patient, and places it on the occipital emplastre of sinapis which is written or treated with emplastres; and this is the way of cauterization: if I have done it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is in good health, well and good; and if not, make three cauterizations on the head as you descend down the neck, with a space of one between each other; and treat it as with the others, and if you see assistance, make the cauterization in the middle; and if mastery is, two more on the two corners, and treat until it is cured; and if the cauterization called "olivare" is used as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and what we have said before; then the head is made cold by the midwife, then the cauterization is performed on the head and each corner, and the buttocks and three on the spine; and if you have more skill, and the body is moist and the midwife is faint, and the disease is far, then make four cauterizations on the spine; and leave it until the least painful bone is arrived, and ease your hand; after the cure as long as it is healthy and the cauterization that we call "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	The first line of the text is "de l'epilempsie".
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should only be treated with fire cautery, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot endure, I make a gargle and mastication modifying the brain often with good meats; after they recover their head in the environment, and I do the cautery according to what we have said before, the cautery on the vein, and on each corne; and if the patient is weak and suffering, I do the cautery as I have said to the one who has paralysis and mollification of the cors, on the spine of the back and collar, and it is the cautery olive according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is anesthetized, I perform the fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	If by melancholy, the causes are excess or corrupted moisture that is large and fleshy, therefore, I cauterize parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by melancholy, the cause is the declining superfluity of melancholy, and the body of the mad man is moist, then he must drink something because the brain is unclean, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cutting the mad man's head; after making a piece of linen well made, as well as a circle, if you put it on his head; and the madman thinks he is well held by all parts; then present the liniment, and it is good to add some old honey; and the patient is heated with fire, so that he can endure it; then empty the circle by cutting off the head, and let it cool; and do this once a week with another government of balm, as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see the burn, then you make points all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing makes the eye very wet; then put on fluffy cotton wool and grease with linen thread.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye of the hairs.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first as hairs, according to the signs I mentioned in the division, then do and drink of the mild thing that cleans the head, and wash all moistures, and let it soak more times without food.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to raise his head, and I cauterize his head, and I cauterize on the two temples where the eye is assembled, or if it is on one side, and cover all the cauterization all veins and arteries that are open and are the cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and wash with cold water, and if you see too much sweating, if it is not good as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, the cauterization that you have mentioned; and no time is ever made to burn or cut off the two bones of the heel.
dou cors des larmes	Many tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and flow down the cheeks, or appear to be the arteries that are in appearance cold and blue; and one sees that it is an excess of cold, moist fat, therefore I perform the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of the remedy for the eyes: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize where they cut off the bones; and if it is necessary, then the cauterization is made with a little cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A great flow of tears due to the hardness of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore drink olive oil; after the head is cut, and I make a cauterization where it is called "clavicle" on the two shoulders, a little soaking of the cheeks; and you will be sewn with the artery that you did not close.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauterization called "clavicle":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the ointment paper is softened by disease and moisture, therefore it is cauterized with this ointment called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	1. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	2. And if you see that I do this cauterization on the two hairs as the sorcerers do; and do not let go of my hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The first sentence translates to: "Do not cut the hair that does not point to the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has it happened that the hair of the oils is converted into parchment, and they prick the oil, and it is done according to two ways: this means to burn with fire, or with an ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then put the midwife in her place; afterward, on the paper of the hairs, make a figure that is as large as the fist, and as the beginning of a sign of the hair; then she puts cotton wool in the grease of olive and musk, and rubs the cauterization according to what it should be.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the part that you have barely touched a few times, and the edges are well-sealed; and signs of health appear when you see the paper retract, and the hairs lift to the point of the oil; then gently place your hand, and wait for three days, then put fine cotton wool in the bore as soon as the burn is healed. After the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is softened, then repeat the cauterization on the same part as before; and if the hairs are long, if the cauterization is done when the paper is raised to its natural point, and is even, and does not prick the hair with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The first line of the text is: "Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz,
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have held on for a long time, if the medicine has not helped you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the stitching is complete, if you raise the leg, and see if the paper is raised as well, as it was raised by tightening with fire or cutting; and if it is not, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more medicine on the leg or if the medicine has not been applied, as long as your stitches are even, and your eyes sewn; then put cotton wool on the bandage as much as the wound allows, after curing the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	If you have the skill to shave well on your own with great care, there will be no harm to the medicine for them.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the paper becomes moist, and the hairs are anointed with oil, then the medicine is resumed on the part that has become softened by the proper paper, as you have done before; afterwards, the cure until it is healthy. And this is the form of the flesh:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the men are of different sizes in height and breadth, according to your constraints; and do not be wrongly directed by the right hand to that which is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and trace the circumference of his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or slip; then apply cotton wool to the inner corner of the eye or to the juice of persillon in the oil; then heat the cauterization instrument that has been divided: and cauterize the head if it forms like a pen point, assemble the cauterization so that it is the head; if you see, if one end is pointed and the other is not, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but all this, what matters is for your own safety.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it swells, and the discharge dries and hardens; if it closes, and the bowel moves, then after forming the cauterization wound, hold your hand on the cauterization wound at the part where the oil is not affected by the grease, so that your hands do not get sick; and put the cauterization wound in the grease of the oil, and it corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then continue the cauterization again once more, and if you are skilled at it, and leave it for three days; after that, put cotton wool in the bure, and apply the desiccating ointment as soon as it is dry, and when 40 days have passed and it is dry, if you put an acidic corrosive medicine on it, so that the bone is exposed; and then follow according to what you found in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understands the fistula, and puts in the forceps the subtle part of the cautery; then makes the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make it to the size of a .З. of plonc; and hold your hand on the cautery firmly, and do not move the patient until the ploncs are hard and do not come out of their oil; and it is necessary to put the oil in the clean linen pouch or in a small bottle: the ploncs if they are close to the fistula, and the healthy person will be safe.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer emetine to the neck, and bring the fistula back to its original position according to what is appropriate for the patient's own throat.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "cracks," and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in divisions, and the patient does not benefit, then use a small cauterization tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he places the head in those cracks as much as it fits; after curing the bone with cerate until it is sound.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gallbladder
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the gallbladder abscess comes from the root or the ureter, or the ducts, or the roots of the teeth, and it becomes infected and forms a fistule; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit much: therefore, it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistule; after the bite or rupture of the fistule, and hold your hand until the wound is healed, and then close it once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, as long as it is sound; and if it is cured once or twice, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the bone and open the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not work, then put a bitter pill in your mouth; after that, wash the cautery that was formed thereafter in this manner, so that it looks like a dog's leash around the tooth; and remove the teeth from the cautery gently, and hold your hand tightly so that the patient feels the pain coming from the root of the tooth; after easing your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; after filling the patient's mouth with bitter water, and paint it once an hour and keep it fresh for a while.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the genital area becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is corroded and dried out.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold, or if it is cold or visible, and medical care is ineffective, then there is a need for cauterization in two ways: and cauterization with brimstone and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with brimstone if it is such that you prefer brimstone of sheep, and the end in a iron or steel fork; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a pen, and make it with brimstone built, and place it on the painful tooth firmly and hold until it is cooled; and often I do this as long as the virtues reach the root of the tooth, and if you see that the linen and cotton in brimstone are burned, and place it on the painful tooth, and place iron chapt around it as much as the flesh reaches to the edge of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. When the fire cautery is used, if it is such that you ignite a piece of iron or steel, and it is large so that the flames do not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, and form it as follows, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often because the pain will be eased for you or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	2. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with hot blood in the pressure of this cautery, and then it becomes red; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the burn as hot as you desire, according to what you can bear; and this is the shape of the cauterization:
des scrophules	of scrofulous boils
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the boils are fleabite and cold, and do not respond to digestion with medicines, then wash the cauterization tool with water after it comes into shape, and make openings for the smoke to escape from the other side; and put the cauterization tool on the abscess as many times as it can, until it is at the point of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cauterization tool according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and put cotton on it as it is sore; after that, cure the lesion with ointments and plasters as it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the collar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture is present in the channels and at the same time when the face becomes cold, it is necessary that the patient be treated with soluble medicines first; after that, I perform a fire cautery at the base of the throat and tell you not to come too close to the throat and do not burn too much but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, I perform another cautery at the joint of the shoulder and call it the "clavicle" as we have mentioned before; and treat the limb as we have said as soon as it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the entire
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the symptoms of measles are cold, and the patient has no fever, and it is an acute disease, then make incisions with the forceps on the sides; and the other cauterization is made between the two hams; and this is called the "clavicle" according to the form mentioned earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterization by pricking at all the cauterizations called "points" of the form mentioned earlier in the disease of the ears; and let the points be at most 30, or less.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the wound according to the method described earlier, and if there is need for cauterization, then use this form of cauterization:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And that's why they are lighter, because you only make three cuts per coil.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After rubbing the affected area on your back and chest; after gently pressing the knot that has caused the twitching with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, then cauterize the area described as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And cauterize the loaf as much as it can be pierced with the cost, and it would come out with four burns; and this is made with a cauterizing iron that has three needles, because the figure of cauterization is six needles; and these needles are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of a cauterizing iron that has three needles.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never has it been adjusted to this nerve because it has eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the cauterizing iron on the nerve with silk, and after letting the patient rest, and do not pull on the limbs as long as they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again, something happens quickly, therefore, perform cauterization on the large cauterization clavicle, or prick with cauteries.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is healed by moisture and is healthy for the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come to the stomach and it is drawn out of its place, and the purges are multiplied for him, and the customary cures are given, and he does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be seated on his back, and his legs and hands are extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. For this reason, I made three burns on the heel of the foot due to the amount of a dose, at all the cauterization sites, and two burns to harden the two knees so that the cauterizations are at three angles, and they should be spaced apart between one and another so that they do not stick together as they sweat; and they should be like this so that they do not bite the two parts of the knee, and the figure of the cauterizations should be according to this form in an equal manner:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	2. And if you see burning the stomach according to this form; and the person who feels pain from this burning, should cauterize by touching and squeezing at the stomach and point according to what you see in quantity; then the cauterization should be all over the burn that is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we had before, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver causes pain and moisture and large viscosity, as soon as it is put in its natural complexion by removing superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and if it does not benefit him, then the patient should be cautery according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, deferring the gallstones, either the cost of the ear comes; and there should be space between each cauterization of a grotesque of a doe; and they should be long and thin cauters, and press not with your hand on all the cauterization; and it should only be the half of the moisture of the knee, and the patient should hold his mouth with both hands; and if it cannot, then it is best to extend his legs and lean his back; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, if you burn these cauteries of the cutaneous type, be subtle and gentle in your art, and wear a girdle that does not burn all of you, for you will dry all of your body; and it will not become smelly, because the hair is fine everywhere, and you see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has gone into the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or in the cloth: if it is in the liver, it feels great pain but not too much; and if it is in the cloth, it feels sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure has done the mirrors, if the blister is swollen on his head; and then stretch the limb or the blister that is attached, and then heat the cauterization that is like a raisin, according to what form it is.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	1. And cauterize as much as the hair is long, and it grows, until the hair becomes too long; after the cure according to the cure of bones as long as it is healthy; and it is only necessary for this cauterization to use no other tools than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	2. And can it be bravely overcome, and I seem that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	3. And a cauterization of weeping
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	4. The ancients said that one must make a cauterization of weeping with roots of Aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of Aristolochia as long as you can find it, and it should be dry, and as large and long as your two fingers; and the oil, and put it on fire, and cauterize as much as between the force and the col, and two punctures cauterize a small piece en descending in the part which is bare of the beard; and two punctures cauterize the nape of the neck, declining downwards from the nape; and the cauterization emmi the pis, and the other on the stomach, and the between the spines, and the spines of the defecating pus that is between the spines; and do not press too hard with your hand, as you would smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient one said that no man uses a fire cautery like the rasping, and they thrust it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the abscess; and then there is great pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	However, in this case, there is no pain or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be saved.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not profit, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you should know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are doing three cauterizations or four, according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the burn on the belly that we mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient's face be near his back; and another way of cauterization if you rub the cauterization that has two nails, just like we showed in the shoulder dislocation; and ease the knee where the hair is, or the pain of the patient comes from the side, and make the elevations according to the knee, according to the length of the arm, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the arm.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you burn the two nerves until the skin is perceived from the other side, then make sure to use the fire cautery, and then apply it to three more. If you see, make sure to cauterize the entire cautery on four nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten phlegm by long tenacities, and this is enough that the other cures before say.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Fire cautery does not apply to dropsy, for it is called the "aplastic" method.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you make four caustics entering the belly, and two entering the stomach, and one entering the liver, and one entering the spleen, and one entering the back, and one near the spine; and make sure the cauteries are well close to the spinal column.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cauterization, let the patient lie still with long hair, and do not disturb the care of the maid after the cauterization; and the healing will speed up, and they will all be assembled together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization for the belly is the bone we show before; and on the back it is olive-shaped, according to what is placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the points
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the points are inflamed with water, and are hard like citrine, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the point between the ear and the anus; and gently hold the cauterization with the tool so as not to turn it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much into the forest, otherwise it will be harder to find one, and the fire cautery should be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cauteries on each leg at the point of the hoof; and let the cauteries be long enough to penetrate the sole of the foot, one in front and the other behind, along the leg; and leave the cauteries to heal for a long time after the cure is done; afterwards, the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the mustard
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are swollen, and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of a green color, then make a fire cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or on the intestine, around the cauterization; and four cauteries should be made subtly at all the cauterization clavicles, and two cauteries on the hams.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	When you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then perform the cauterization on the point, and the cauterization on each side, and the punctures on the stomach, because the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of the hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are either fundament or several, and are old and large, and made up of cold and moist putrid humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit much if cauterization is done: III on should make an incision on the backbone, which is all deformed and broken in many places, and the cauterization on the bowels II times; and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face on the large cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cauterizations; and leave the cauterization over long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the leg as much as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chalcedony which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you touch hellul, if the cautery looks like a rasps, and then place it completely on the hellul coped; and leave as much of your hand as the cautery reaches to the vein's birth, without cutting; do this once or twice, and if it is lacking in hellul, cauterize each one as we have said; after treating wounds as much as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound that was not treated properly
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure further treatment or opening, we will tell you in their case when they become seriously ill and cannot be healed by cauterization alone.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awakened and starts to produce sour milk and rotten moisture, if you provide it with total care and keep it at all times in the tent as it has, then you should guard the whole tent carefully.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cauterization is washed and the bougie is placed in the fistula according to the amount of paste that entered, and the cauterization is resumed as long as the corns are sore and corrupted; once or twice, depending on the amount of ointment used; and warded off with a leather that has been cut, and large wounds.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	1. If the fistula is in the course of the ureter and the intestine, and you are sewing these loops, and do not perform this unless it is in the groin, and think that it is not a permanent solution; after healing the groin as much as possible, and if the loops are still present, and the materials are long and strong, then you can say that the groin is completely healed; and if the materials are not long and strong, say that the groin is torn, and corrupted the bone at its root; and then like one of these that we will say in his groin.
de la maladie des reins	2. of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the head comes on suddenly, and with great wind, and no woman is near, then it is necessary that you burn it on both sides of the hair at the cauterization iron that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in a moment, there will be three burns in line, and they will help greatly.
de la vessie	of the uterus
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the uterus is large and weak, and moist, if the midwife retains the urine, then you should burn it in the part of the hair that is near the uterus, either on the left or right side, and so that each cauterization is as far apart as one pace; and you should also cauterize the back of the uterus, or II may be too much; and so the cauterizations should be done according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the marrows
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flow is corrupted and late; and when they come, it causes great pain: therefore, it is necessary to make three cauterizations along the belly, as we have said or cautery of the uterus, and second cauterization on the back; and if it is a cauterization of the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the haunch
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the haunchbone, and for this reason if it is still in its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the limbs are in different departments, if it comes that you cauterize the patient on the haunchbone at the cautery point like a circle, and seignes before the knee on the haunch so that the haunchbone turns the circle; and if it is the cauterization such as those made on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three olive-sized cauterizations and they should be as large as the others; and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the back, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of large amounts of fetid pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: it is to know how to assemble burning medicines and cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	1. If the fire cautery is followed by various methods, then some are like this: you cauterize on the handle of the hazel according to this form, and make a good depth and thickness, and leave between each cauterization a space equal to a dozen, and it is olive oil; never once does one cauterize on the end of the hazel stem, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	2. And if you see, if the cauterization is made on the circle we have mentioned in the dislocation of the hazel; but make it in part manner that the circles contain the whole hazel, and all its ends as they are.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how one treats in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And when the pain reaches the thigh and the knee, one should cauterize there either the ankle or the malleolus IV times, on the side where there is less flesh; and whether it is the cutaneous or the espesseté dou keur cauterization, and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two points or close to the cautery which is called "points", then it should be cauterized at those points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is from the knee to the thigh, then cauterize with a circular or cutting cautery; and take good care of all your cauterizations so you don't burn the nerves and large arteries more than the cauterization, and do not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen others who cauterized on the ankle and caused pain that made the leg swell completely, the toe as well, and it was noticed and corroded in all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts assembled, make a fire cautery on both, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And in the fire cautery of the thigh, at which they say, do it in this manner: make a piece of iron as follows, let it be as heavy as some large nut or less, and let it be divided into parts and let each part be divided into smaller pieces; let the divisions be equal to two parts, and let them be like noses, and have a handle of well-made iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scraped as much as it is red and greasy-feeling, and then place it on the malleable shoulder of the patient, and bend it on the costeit; and the cautery is once reheated and left for three jors; and then apply ointment, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure of the ointment as much as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cauterization because of the pain of the patient, and it is all that they can endure; and this is called burns, which they can bear, and later on, if they wish.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The ardent cauteries of medicine are those that you make and instruments with handles that enter the corner of the door, and are either of iron or of gold at one end, and in the middle have two pieces, and in the upper part have a quantity of the growth of a doe; and they are overturned and cut, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After putting the handle of the axe in the patient's grips, firmly press your hand on the handle; then grease between the two circles of the hot iron that is heated in the fire pit, and leave it for an hour, suffering the patient's pain and anxiety.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the cauterization is as if by fire; and when the cauterization has been removed, ease your hand with the instrument and raise the axe handle of iron soft, and leave it for three hours, and let it be as long as the black part of the bandage is osteit; and then leave three hours that the salve is straightened; and this will help after the care of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that resembles what you have done in the hair; and this is the way of the hot tool, and I have written or described the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Prepare alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and mix them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a small hole that the tip of a razor cannot go through, and then pour it into another pot well-filled, and add alkaline and charcoal and soft ash, as much as you have two powders in your hand; and leave it until it drips water or can be poured, then take all this ash, and mix it with chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	1. And when it is a matter of ague and the patient is in the state of mind of a novice in medicine and cauteries of other parts, then she will make an effort as if it were fire, and if other remedies are used such as well-applied hot iron, anacardium, and chalcedony with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	1. Galen relates a cure by which some were cured of the pain of the chilblain and sciatica, and he told us to follow this cure, and that it was completely cured in one case after performing this cure, and he was bathed in the same way as he instructed us afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And then in another way, you should massage the affected area with fresh and dry vervain, and apply it to the shoulder, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the pressure.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then I have it enter a bath as long as the chest is not raised, and then I have it enter a laxative, and the pain will disappear completely and it will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	I advise that no one should use such a hot cauterizing medicine after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the hoof of a goat, it helps; and it must be done in a certain way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the linen and grease it slightly, then place it in the pouch that is between the little finger and the other, which is called the fascia.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After drying the goat's hoof and heating it until it is charred, and then placing it on the linen, and leaving it as long as there are stains; and repeat again, and continue until you think with your senses that it will reach the hip, and that the pain will cease; and this method of cauterization is called "cauterization with a goat's hoof.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by touch or percussion or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of cold expanded matter, in none of these appearances is cauterization justified, rather it should be used on that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been cleansed of fetid pills or other appearances, that you cut on the back, where the pain remains, three lines marked with a line V, and in each line you cauterize or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear; and make the cauterization according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IV on the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects many children, and the signs of its beginning are seen when they have their teeth tightened as they grow, and cry; and you see the spine bent double and the appearance that comes with the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe its cure, if it is burned at the cauterization point according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization turns purple in every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if the cauterization is performed at the end of the spine at the point where it is pricked with two or three points, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and warned that you should not perform a cauterization in gilberry that is in spam of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints comes from moisture that is expanded to every member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: make a cut on the joint of the affected part, and if the cauterization is olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it is your intention that you touch the face with long hair, then the cauterization is done all over the cauterization as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the joints and other joints, and it happens many times, then the cauterization is done on each knee III or IV of each part, all over the olive cauterization; and if you have skill for more, but do not hold your hand too long as much as the pain allows.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, apply the cauterization that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pain remains in the hands, then I make nine punctures along the line of the fingers; and if there is no more pain, then I make punctures at each joint and at the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes from the costal or shoulder blade, then cauterize each part and govern the patient's behavior with the physician and prescribe medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you govern his behavior and purge him of filth, then he will be cured by God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rage of the face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rage comes in wrath, and his brow hangs down and is new, then if you see that when you cure him he does not throw it away; and that he uses things that soften the stomach, so that he comes out of his stomach; after which you place it on his back between your hands, and command that he lick his hair as much as it is repaired, and draws it to your two hands, and signs with a sign that is like half of a circle around the curved bone, and in all signs that are like the half of a circle around the curved forehead; then wash the cauterization with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and has a slight moisture.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then smooth the bails on your leg; and the midwife stains her hand to make sure they do not return; she works well on the thighs of the patient, and puts the cautery sign on all her hands, and then puts it on the mark, and holds it firmly and as far as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you touch the bone; and be careful that the bile does not rise when you make the cautery, that you do not burn it, and that neither the midwife nor any other midwife dies.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone at the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be done subtly according to the size of the bone, and also for adults according to their size; after three days, cure the leu of the wound as much as possible until the burn is healed; after the cure of other ointments as long as it is healthy, and gently put 40 jors on his back as long as the wound is well soaked; and it is necessary that the stitches be tightened for a long time, so that the exudate does not come out when he goes to bed in rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find it difficult to stand, and after forty more days; and he should rest, so that he works quickly and does not have too much intoxication from drinking and eating, and does not have too high fever; and when he has completed this instruction, he is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the treatment of trimming in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are known, and you see that they are not increasing, he should re-cautery according to the quantity, and so is the third angle of this form; after the treatment as we have said; and no of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at a three-angle according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	1. But sign that the shoulder is healing and make a line for the widest part of the fracture, and another line for the narrowest, and hold your hand on all the cauterized clavicle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	1. However, the first burns are less painful and more effective.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	2. of pain in no member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	2. When pain comes in no member, either from chill or wound, and the pain lasts long, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized at the cauterization point called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the member and its narrowness and its weakness and its location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is healthy after the first burn, that's good; if not, restart the burn at another spot, because it is customary for the patient to die at the part where the burn was applied, since it is necessary to perform the burns until the patient becomes healthy.
de meselerie	of medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The remedies are never helped by the burn once, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the burning, when the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and not too soon or too late, and you doubt that corruption will spoil all the patient, then I make the following burns on the head: I cut off the hair, and the other on the forehead at the end of the curls; and they touch the corners, and the back to the hip; and it lasts as much as your hand that the burn lasts until the bone, and as much as the discharges issue forth so that the vapors of the large humors may issue forth; and I cauterize on the nails according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	1. If the wound is widespread; it is evident, if you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned or chief, and one cauterizes in general, and two cauteries are on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries are on the spine of the back, and the knuckles and the other fingers, and two cauteries are on the wrists and the ankles, and all the joints of the hands and feet, and the pits of the hands; and you will find nerves that are located below the shoulder blades, which are not burned, and no time has been made for a cauterization on the bone of the elbow, and the other on the stomach bone, and the other on the liver bone.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When you perform more cauterizations, the patient benefits more and does not feel pain in the cauterization if it is not as corrupt as the heart.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then the cauterization is made on the member according to its size and thickness; and the treatment of ointments as soon as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	1. And no time is it done when cauterized and on the hand, wrist, and back, at the end of the nerve that is silent to the member, and if it is not flattened; and all this does not interfere with anything if one is not aware of the members and the movements of the forearms.
de albaras	2. Of scars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. When the disease known as "scars" is aroused, and the art of medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery once every fortnight, according to the amount of the sweat, until the blister is ostee and turns red; then use flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and salves of colic and gout, for each part; and put all together, and bind with a bandage, and apply to the skin as often as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the wise ones say that cauterization is also made in the circumference of the sore; and I think it is not very good because it may cause ulcers and corruption, and I have always wanted it to happen once; and the most appropriate thing is that it is cauterized around, with the cautery called "circular," as we have said in the past.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the tumor that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have a disease called 'adubelati', and it delays measuring either due to excessive production or because the patient's condition is too weak when they are old (i.e., very old), and they have little strength, or because of tightness; and you see it hesitating to measure: therefore, apply the cauterization by pricking with small cauterizing points; afterward, leave it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hesitate to measure.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it hesitating at all the cauterization, if the cauterization is too hot, then the form of the cauterization is not correct.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the environment of these diseases called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has perceived the heat, and it is such that the patient feels the cauterization in a way that the course of the urine is altered to some extent.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment when it is completely healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cauterization with fire by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease called "corrodents" and it is nothing more than a rot of the limb, because it eats the limbs as it does the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization with fire, then sharpen the cauterizations with small and large iron claws according to where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts as much as possible, and there will be nothing left of it, that everything that is corrupted is not osteit.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it remain for three days, and put on oiled bandages that cause burns with oil as long as the cauterized parts are still burning and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ignited wounds with fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days there are no healthy burns being born, it is good; and if not, continue the cauterization on the parts that are still corrupting.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has never been cured by medical treatment in the place of fire cauterization; but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said that the cure of the medical treatment in the division: take what you have in hand.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the porals that come to the piez
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it has happened that the piez was opened by accident due to a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that causes the piez to bend.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is known as fire cauterization, and hot iron cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is when you heat the iron until it glows like a torch, and it is made of red-hot iron according to the size of the nail that can be bent at all points, and has subtle margins; after that, you put the iron on the nail and turn your hand completely around the nail as it grows in the nail's root; then it leaves for three days until it starts to exude sweat; then I make a poultice of well-kneaded mud and leave it on all night, and the nails will be loosened from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment by rubbing it in as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they turn into deformed corpses, and many times appear in hands and fingers, then it is necessary that you perform a hot iron cautery; and in this way: take a nail or an iron pin, or a feather, and put it on the nail and the cloverleaf, which is to cover the warts; and then put the nail on so that it covers everything, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn until the edge of the nail reaches the root of the cloverleaf, and it will find the hot water way perfectly shaped; and suffer the patient a little mordication of the hot water for an hour; then leave it alone, and it will fall off all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I make another after this, as long as you are careful of all these that are in the course, then I treat the wounds that engorge blood.
li cure dou trembler	it trembles
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If any tremble from cold or fever, or other, if it comes that you make four cauteries or four on the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization or a pinch, and on the stomach at the olive oil cautery; if it allows the trembling to cease, and the health improves from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	small pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	There is no instance where baths or pustules appear on the body, which come from large corrupting materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to cauterize them as soon as they appear, use a subtle cautery made of mirrite wood, or if the point is burned with fire, or the root of Aristolochia, or in a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never are the cauterized ones made at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow new enqui forward, but are disordered by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the wound is closed
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great dislocations of blood from the wound that is closed at the incision or aphidiotomy, or fire cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is the worst thing to open.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when there is none, if you have to put your index finger at the vein wound, and press as much as possible until the vein is calmed by your index finger, and no more pain; then heat the olive-oil cauteries more often and larger so that they are all red; then I, or according to the size of the wound and the location of the leu, put the fire on the vein where the artery is located, and place the cautery at the vein where you hold your index finger, and hold the cautery until it is no longer painful.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If it jumps faster when you tie the vein with your other hand, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another cautery that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after the other until the nerve is no longer tight; and beware of burning the flesh that is red, and that no other malice comes upon the patient; and you should know that as soon as the artery is not dislocated, it cannot be well relieved immediately until the artery is large, if it is not by one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cauterization or extraction when it is properly treated, or by gentle twisting of the thread, or by medicines applied which can cause relief from pain; and it should be tied and extracted.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will carefully maintain the ligature of threads or things burning on it, or other similar things, should not profit from it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is none, and no remedy or medicine is present, then he must put his index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is sore from the wound and the vein; and he should not move much, but often he must be cold, so that it does not freeze and become swollen and sore; and one should make inquiries beforehand about those who can cauterize and medicate.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	1. We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases, whether it is to cauterize with fire or with burning medicines, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterizations; and I have written this chapter for those who want to learn more about them in a lighter way.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	2. And if you begin this chapter, it is necessary, my dear, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first part of cauterizations, and for this reason more caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	3. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you not to attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many ways of people coming for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have become so sick that they die easily due to the relief they find in their illness, and the greatness of their malice; and these should be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who do not understand you and say: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is unscrupulous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It only requires that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your covenant, and do not believe everything, but rather what you are certain of and what you can have taken and lost; and use divination and indication in the cures of your diseases for the conversion of health; and this will help to this good reputation, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three years' labor, Our Lords grant you understanding and uprightness, and if you will seek the holy inspiration of its hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in stipulating it according to the work of cauteries, which I have prescribed for the chief joints, because you will find it more easily what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full-grown joint with inflammation.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Symptoms of this disease often appear in children multiple times during infancy, and when the head is forced too hard on the child's joint; and never has it been caused by any other reason that it has not been.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease in adults, and all that I have seen resulted in death; therefore, it seems to me that I should mention the opening of veins in some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I have seen a child with acute illness, and the head of the shoulder was swollen each time it could not support itself; and I thought that this moisture was the cause of death, and this moisture is assembled in the joint between the knee and the hip, between the two bones; and the dislocations are such when the moisture is between the knee and the hip, and the abscesses are small, which you should consider as a large wound for the head of the shoulder; and so long as the swelling continues, the form of the spatulate will be like this.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more intense, and the abscess is larger, then I will make cuts in this manner: according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has penetrated the bone, and you see the corners of the head swelling in each part, and the pulse jumps suddenly when you press on it with your hand, and this has not been noticed before: then you may need to cut the head into three parts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the threads and powders, and mixing in wine and oil, and leaving it for five days; then remove the dressing, and cure the wound with poultices and compresses, and leave the head evenly bandaged, and then apply dry hot meat to the wounded flesh until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is to look or open the large end of the abscess, and the sharp edge; for it is never in front; never on the back; never on the side; and never on the bottom.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Size accordingly the opening of the abscess and the sharp edge, and they are made according to what you have; and do not close the artery; and come forth with blood, if the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of pus.
de reume	from rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is any disease called "cataract" in the eyes or ears, and the disease is ancient, and the cure by medicine does not help much, therefore it is better to cure with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient holds his head steady; then the doctor gently rubs the lower part of the face with a sponge until the arteries are visible, then he gently pulls the head back onto the sponge; then look to see if the eye sockets are aligned, and both are returned to their original position; then sign the eyes that they are closed, then cover one and the other with a small piece of lint as tight as possible, until the size fits the bone, and that is done by the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, cut the lint from the artery and cover it over, cutting it accordingly as needed.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, if the blood does not cease to flow continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon pressure, then measure the quantity of blood that flows out, and if it is more than three drops, then make a incision and fill the hole; and if there are six drops or more, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery, then look at the wound: if the wound remains on the bone without causing pain, then stop the wound and bind it with a bandage, and continue the treatment with antiseptic until it is healed.
de emigrainne	The first sentence to translate is "de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the swelling comes, and the eye is red, due to moisture from tears and sweat, and the old pain is perhaps worse, and it is treated with medicinal cures and all that does not help, if we strangle the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient has many hairs on his temples, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly repaired rather than in any man who is too foolish; and when it is repaired, if he draws back his collar from the patient's hair, then rub the edge of a rough cloth on the neck of another hot water, as long as the artery opens obviously; then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scorch the leather until you feel the artery, then take it up with pincers, and cut off as many scales as possible from each part; and if the artery is subtle, and the point of the uncinate turns, then the cope of that part follows according to the number of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, then it will not be able to move at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And cut off about six ounces of blood, and if the artery is large, then it will be able to lie in two thirds of a thread of fine silk, which does not come before the wound, and comes out with the blood; then cut off the excess that is between the two thirds at that time, and then, if you see, if the cauterization is as hard as the bone until the heads are cut off; and this is the best work, if the patient has no fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is help to finish the moisture: for it is of greater aid to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is necessary to extract the arteries with great care: with a thick cloth filled with water and placed on well-made tents; and if you loosen them, be sure to use dry medicines that make the wound clean and clean tents, as long as they are healthy; and if there is no cort of the artery, do as you have done, or use your leek and press it in your hand that it may not become infected; and if you do not have this now, put your finger on the part where the vein is not frozen, and raise the vein with cold water as much as possible, and then extract it as you must; and what is most difficult and lightest in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery sharply cut by two parts, but the cut should be sharp to last longer without gangrene.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the wound is too large, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between two and three cloves of garlic, and then when you feel the two holes are full, and you hold your breath as long as it burns until it reaches the bone, and close the vein in the two holes; and they should be far apart between the two heads because it is not safe to do this cautery all over; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are dripping from the veins that are loud in the heat of fever, and it does not profit much for medicine, and you see the face of the patient is pale and weak, as if the hair of the paper is wet, and the papers are soaked, and burned by the heat of the tears, if it is fitting for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And it was called the "old cure for contusions," and that is why you should make the patient who has this disease shave the hair on his front, then make three incisions on his forehead according to the length of his forehead; and one of the incisions is like the other two, but made with a razor that has been dipped in vinegar, and the others are made with the edges of the papers, and keep your incision away from the arteries that are made with the edges of the papers; and separate your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound is the quantity of three drops of blood across the joints; and you have appeared a piece of sponge and moisten the cloth with water to let the blood ooze out of the sac, then cut the spatula according to the part that is most affected.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	1. "Of the incision that is made in the temple just above the second incision; and burns all that is between the two fangs of the entire face that is under the bone, then I make another part of the other second incision, and then extract this sputum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	2. "If blood is drawn in the first fang with the instrument called 'cultivator', and is very thin on one part, and very thick on another part, do not thin it, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	3. "And turn the costeit-tailing towards the cheek, and the costeit becomes thinner towards the bone, and the blood as much as it reaches to the second fang.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And cut off all the veins that hang down as much as possible until the incision is continued as far as it opens, and then another part is made to fend around the other end; and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the leeward side of the knee for the blood taken; then put a piece of soft cotton in each fend, and wrap it with flannel brushed with wine and oil and vinegar, and keep the stitches from coming out; and after that let the limb lie still, and apply a large dose of tincture of wormwood with olive oil, and other ointments that are used for wounds, as long as it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	The first sentence to translate is: "dou reume des eulz
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is no need for a bloodletting practice, and you see the hair thin and short, and the eyes are distorted, and the papers burned; and the skin pricks, and often with great pain, and the malady worsens; therefore, be careful of these accidents that these materials and this catarre only come for many veins, and the cure that is given is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut on his forehead, and another large one in the middle.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	The text continues with the procedure for the surgical incision of the temporal bone on the left side, and the removal of the temporal nerves that move in the ear; when the bone is exposed, all the blood should be absorbed by a sponge, and then it is covered with two layers of linen, followed by moistened cloths of linen and silk. Then, the wound is dressed with ointments containing wine and oil, and care must be taken to prevent infection; when the bone is set, if the pain increases as the bone begins to heal, then the treatment of things that cause inflammation, such as charcoal, should be applied.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of linen thread, and make a paste; and apply it to these wounds for healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earwax
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that comes out of the ears is one of the four things: grains, stones, mineral points, or similar things; or seeds, like hazelnuts, feathers, peas; or something that flows, like acrid and ashy substances and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes out of the ear through the earhole or in any other way that does not fit well in the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the piercing, if no drop of violet or gum oil is distilled, then it is extracted; and I make the discoloration, and it smokes the nostrils as it is extracted, and put the ear pieces of velvet or wool; and the ear is at the desus.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment often comes out once; and if it does not come out, then it is extracted with fine tweezers, and the form is like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with tweezers, it is bad; if not, then extract with fine tweezers at the bone marrow of a small hole; and if it does not jump out, then make a loop of thread and cut the end of the cord or ear hole, and smoke it which is inside the ear wax if it comes in with the ear, then the treatment is formed, as we have said, if it does not come out in this way, then take some glue on the eyelids, and put in no instrument that can hurt it to make, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue on the piercing or whatever it is, and extract.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, if you insist on pricking the ear even if it causes spasms, and the manner of pricking is to first use the blade of the scalpel on the temporal bone of the patient, according to the measure of its strength, then hold the blade between your hands and turn the ear towards the opposite side, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a moon, as you go to the piercing, then the bone according to your strength, and the suction comes to your mouth; and the cure as soon as it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is the grain that is in and it swells, then administer the extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the i spatumile tenve subtil according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not cut too much when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, as long as you have done many pieces; then extract it with subtle pincers and saliva, as we have said, if the extractions are successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, if the patient has a grain in the ear, then the midwife should use an esrnuement of condization first, and fill the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be known on this ear itself or where the fever is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If she does not jump, then take many piercings according to the length of your arm, and make them light; and put the herbs on one ear, and let it drip from there onto the other parts of your ear, and be careful with another hole in the ear that is in the ear; and continue to do this hole after hole until the fever is all gone, and when she jumps, all the fever is gone; and if you see, if you take one joint, and burn one of the joints in the ear, and the other joint hold in fire as much as the hotter joint is; then do another part of the joints as much as the fever is all gone, just like we said on the hole.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the tooth, if it is small in size, similar to a pea and a similar thing, it is treated as we have said in the division; but if it is large in size, it can be felt, which is the more delicate part to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of the ears' jewelry, if you treat it as we have said in the division and use distillations, and the treatment does not profit, then look at the ear with the sun: if there are no holes, if you pull out the pliers gently, and if there are, then take the noose of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And bite the lesser part of the ear according to the amount of suffering, then all the cat will form, often as often as you see.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey, then thrust the cotton into the ear as we have said in the vein; and if they do not soak in as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the decision of the verse, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, whatever form it may be, so be it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And let silver or gold be melted into the smallest piercings, and let it flow over; and to press the distillation with a well-made copper instrument, and see if you have the rake and wrap around the end of the cotton; then let your oil or juice gush out, and what you see of your medicines in the case, and the case is in the ear; then blow gently with the rake over all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes from the ear; and it will feel the patient's pain, and so are the distillations I pour into the pot at the same time as I distill in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine will not work if it's not hot enough.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the fever of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without having a fever in the ears; and this very same thing happens due to fever or an ear infection, and these fevers never appear in the ear unless one can see; and no time has it ever happened that the pertussis was not visible, and it was seen quite well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The first sentence translates to: "That which comes in front, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of healing in other cases, and in this one, it is necessary to place the ear of the maiden in the sun; look: if you see the apparent inflammation, then the ointment has completely covered this spot of mine.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And also, and continuing forward and backward, if it does not scrape the ear; if the inflammation is of the cheek or neck of the ear, then as long as the char is all on the cheek, use gentle tweezers and a light cope.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ointment is applied in the ear, then take a soft, light rasping tool and gently scrape it, then put a little fire on it.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the ointment that the malamud sends chills to the ear, gently pierce, and keep your ear's nerves; then put in the ear a tent according to the large pore, and apply some Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not cut the wound as long as the pain is not subsided, or if you put in a tent and moisten it with rose water and powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swelling, then cover the tent with another soft tent made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling goes down; then cure it as soon as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	When the patient feels pain, if a wet sponge is plunged and applied cold, and placed on the ear, and other treatments that stop the dislocation of the joint are used which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper charm
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	That which comes from paper is the hair of the head when it is wet and dry, if you extend it with needles and tweezers, and cover it with a piece of gum from its roots; then put it on the scalp.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it is not decorticated, if the cautery is a fine cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth its weight; and they are often repaired, and no root suffers from anything; and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, things come in the form of papers that seem like gravel, and because of this, this disease is called "granule," and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper and outside; the dislocation is such: take care that the granule does not move on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make it very wide, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and close.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not feel the paper with your fingers a little, and if it does not hurt the patient; and if the assembly is large, if it is sewn, and the cure is done as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, then do not make too much force, because the restoration will be done gently and carefully.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	1. And if the snowflakes descend towards the ear's lobe to the part above it, and if you reverse the paper, and the snowflakes are placed on forceps, and the paper is pressed from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by incision, it causes no harm; and when the snowflakes are placed, then lift the salty tear oil, and cure the ear that is misaligned as much as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	2. of the grease of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	3. Exina is a grease that gets stuck in the threads of the paper, and this happens more often with children, and it causes pain to their hairs, and they come to the cathouse in the morning, and cannot see the sun's light because the tears get to their hairs; and for this they lie on their sides, and sleep, and their papers are soaked in moisture that the flesh and appearance have become covered with exina.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the joint with your hand and feel the exertion within it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the wound is if the patient places their head in your hand; and then take a strip of linen, and make a circle according to the quantity contained in each part of the exertion, and place it over the wound; and press with your hands on both sides so that the exertion is assembled within the circle; then make a mileau of the moisture at the sore, trenchant a large furrow, no larger than the wound you make at the healthy vein; and make the skin cover it as much as possible so that you can see the exertion; and in other ways, the exertion comes from the furrow, according to the shape of a greasy pimple.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Pull the hair all around your body with a piece of bedclothes between your two hands, and turn your hands to the right and left as much as possible; and make sure you do not pull on the skin, that you do not touch any part of your body, and do not hurt yourself.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. If the hair does not open at the beginning of the shaving, lightly shave a little until it appears; then pull the hair as we have said, and fold the cloth in half and in half, and put it on your arm, and pull gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who cut their hair and put on their heads to make the moisture which is drying more.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor, if he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms at the wound site, and the doctor uses the scalpel gently to avoid causing further pain.
des poilz des papieres	of the paper fibers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper fibers grow unnaturally, and are brushed, they can harm the eyes and cause diseases such as tears and paper mollifications. This is due to the destruction of the hairs. The doctor treats it in four ways: either by burning together with fire, or by medicine according to what is recommended for cauterization, or by cutting and stitching, or by teeth, as I will mention.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	1. It is necessary that you place the main stem of the patient's tooth in your mouth, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it turns, it is good; if not, then insert an awl into all the holes of the file; and let the margin of the paper or the hair that grows from the hair be on the margin of the paper, and turn the file to the right in your left hand, and then cut off the part that is loose, adjusting the hair evenly, all around the tooth; then remove the file, and place a small piece of silk and thread on the paper, and secure it with a knot, as you see the mirror does, and if it comes out, it should be according to the quantity that you see rising from the paper that is marked with the teeth.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body that is skilled at handling paper can handle a great amount of paper according to its condition, then cut all the threads along the two lines you have written, and start with large, sharp scissors; and one of the fringes near the natural hair growth in length, then cut the root at one of the two angles, then scrape the rest; then assemble the two loops on an embroidery needle for every strand of fine thread, and sew the suture, and remove any excess thread from the ends of the silk threads you see, if you do this; and if not, then leave the stitching and threads as is for three or four days; then cure the wound around the stitching with loose, constricting things, because the paper relaxes with the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is dead (as they say the old ones), and it is overwhelming if there is pain; and if in another way: and it is that you see the paper as a figure that is also like the flower of mirth, as we have mentioned, at three incisions, follow the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes what exceeds small forces evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	Then, if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take a needle or a thread, and cut it to the length of your thumb; and take another thread of about the same length for the large part, and a smaller one for the small part, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then gently press with your hand evenly, and gently sew all the stitches you have made, as we have experienced, then close the wound with suture, and treat it until it is healthy; and if the suture comes to your incision, if the edge is smoothed and the stitching is even; and never has the hair of the paper turned into: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The patient is treated for rabies if it follows this form: and if you convert the paper according to what I said, and then make the snakes by hand, and tie them as tightly as the paper and the threads are long; and hold the heads of the parts you hold the threads; then assemble the two and the other subtly over the paper of the oil, and draw the snakes from the two parts formed; and leave no others, and the leather that is stretched will become rough and wrinkled and torn, as it becomes by it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the patient has enough strength, then treat as soon as possible; and when the wound is healed and the paper is lifted, and no more hair is tied; and this is the form of the two snakes you will make according to this figure and quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	1. The dislocation is such that you need a fine needle, and a piece of silk thread of the same thickness; then assemble the heads and gently pull them apart, and make the ends of the threads as long as possible; then take another fine silk thread and pull the other end, and note the length of the threads; then put the malady's head in your hand; and if the dislocation is not corrected, it is because it is a small dislocation and delicate, then cut the needle all the way through the chase at its root, and make it perceive on the paper as you pull it through the natural hair; then pull the hair until you reach the end of the chase, and cut in the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then pull your hand as the hair comes out all over the chase on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	1. And if the chase is treated and the hair does not come with it, then when you have ordered the chase to the end of all that you have commanded, as long as the chase comes out with pain and you see it through the vision of the oil; therefore, if you order the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and rises up; and if the hair is short, then accompany it with one long hair from the cheeks naturally, and cut it with the one you let, as long as it is elongated and then lie it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fat
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil coming, comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to open the vein is to cut off the suture, and cleanse the lips, and put on linen tents, and leave them as long as they are healthy; and it is only necessary to use in the cure of the veins things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	If you do this, the disease worsens than the first; but the work of things that make something softer, like figs; and the blister of quin or aloe and linen seeds are cooked, and oils are made from none of them, and they envelop a tent, and the cure for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you give in guard that it does not sound like according to its form before; and these ovraiges that we have said are no better than remedies for this disease, that it does not revive according to its form before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the char that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease called "axacrati" is truly an accident and natural one.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and burns and things similar; and the sight of the shoulder is that if you prick with an needle, if it has two threads, and the thread in the char, and it feels like a left side arm as far as the right, so the needle comes in the head of the shoulder; then the shoulder is at the end of all the needle, and the thread in the wide part of the spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the paper is bent according to what it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a ruler and put it in the fire, turn the paper, and make as many furrows as the paper can bear; and let the heads of the angles of the incision you made be like those of a letter that has no "I" grimace; then straighten them according to the quantity of their bentness, which is equal to the amount of the paper it covers, then adjust the other parts, and make them equal in length with a linen thread; then cure as we have said about the mollifying medicines and plasters, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	1. If the disease comes from burning or sewing or cauterization, then it is necessary to remove a simple burn from the hair of the papers, according to what is before; then enter between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be performed according to the shape of the disease, because it is different in shape, and the skilled masters use various instruments to achieve the return to its natural form; and the disease itself, according to what is necessary to remove and extract in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	2. If the paper is damp, it should be dried.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this cauterization comes to the hands of women in such a way that the paper on it is saturated with oil, and cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then it comes that you cut the point of a razor blade underneath the paper, and lift it up; and the tweezers, as long as you touch what is affected by the subtle spumous exudation, which is neither too much nor too little, so that the patient can suffer from the spumous exudation rather than the oil bleeding; and your incision, which you scratch of that assembly, lightly, so that the paper reforms according to its natural shape; and it is healthy for all that assembly, and never causes any amount of the acrid cold oil, and raises it to the cold sweet oil, and then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put a fine smooth hair on top of the oil; and after the third day use colsa and other soothing things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	The first sentence to translate is "de l’ungle de l’oil". The translation is not
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The first sentence to translate is "Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres". The translation is: "There are two types of the nail: it is nervous and resembles a hard, dry, white skin, and another that is not nervous but resembles wet, moisturized glass that, when touched with iron and cooked with pincer-like tools, does not move; and both types resemble the great enemy, grow quickly, and spread as much as they cover all vision and light and movement of the nail.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The first sentence to translate is "Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz". The translation is: "And the manner of the incision is that if the surgeon puts his finger in the nail, then he cuts the hairs; and gently place the paper on your hand, then take a pair of tweezers with a small forceps, and hold the nail at the root; then take a needle, and insert the tail of the horse, or of the sheep, or of the beef, and the thread tight; and double the point of the needle a little and the thread pierces through the nail, and tie it with a thread and pull it out at the root, and scrape off all the hair from the nail that extends to the chief, then cut the remaining part in the root of the nail, and leave the natural or broken nail, so that by the incision does not come the tears of the customary; and never has the nail been set at the nail only, and over time, as we have said; then it is scraped all the hair so formed:".
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the stitch does not touch the charred skin and break it, and that the needle is not perceived; and after the incision, a little oil is poured into the hole, and some wool is laid down, and it is closed with thread, and left to itself for one day; then the care of what he needs until he is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you do not thrust the needle, and the unguis cannot enter, this appearance of the nail is often treated with medicines; and as I have said in the division, and if you see it clouded, then use oil from the physician's hand, and take a light stitch of thread according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently remove the nail, and if you see that it does not move and the reason is that it is pressed, then distill from your mouth into the oil made of lavender and red colies and seal broiet, and extinguish the oil with the other jar; then continue the other incision according to this same work, until it is all done.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in the oil, like an abscess, then the milk, and cure first the abscess as soon as it is safe, then continue the incision as before, as long as it is safe.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the flesh of the arm appears in the oil at night due to great fatigue, and there is only a part that does not suffer, and tears do not appear; then it distills into the oil that is reddish-colored and made from litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the wood that was pruned
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people never prune any wood, and they cut the branches and roll them up on paper and twist them into a rose; and if the branches are very thick, then it appears like a balsam tree; and the wound if it is that the surgeon puts his finger in the patient's mouth, then he operates on the wounds, and cuts all this wood as cuttable pieces for the patient, and supports it with force; then make the first cut, and take all of it to the razor until the end, and keep the oil away from the wound; and the incision of a small amount of saporific substance that we have said in the incision of the fingernail and with slight forces of the hand, if it forms after this chapter what we have demonstrated; and when the incision is completed and all the wood is removed, if you use oil of silk or distilled red wine and medicines corrosive, and put it on the wound with a piece of cotton, so that it is secured by stitching; and if it does not require anything, and the hand passes over it, and you doubt aposteme chaut, then leave the oil and cure aposteme chaut with things soothing aposteme chaut; then return to your wound as soon as it is safe, and then make other cuts in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you heal the care of every weak vein of nature; and of the accidental vein, in the fire of iron; and do not force your hand into any of these fires as long as you see that the member is not affected by that fire.
des voines des eulz	of veins of hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If there are red veins that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye and harm the eye.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil that is present, and if it is hot, and there is no other disease but the oil, then do it in this way: instruct the patient to put their head in your hand, then let those veins bleed all over according to your judgment, and make the veins subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let each bone be cut in equal degrees according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then cut these forces subtly, and remove the harder parts of the oil afterward, as long as you can see the harder parts of the oil; and do not cut the oil with sharp points of spatulas, and make this incision at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your incision so that you do not cut into the harder parts; and when you have done this, distill the greener and redder oil to corrode what is left of the more difficult part.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot cut all of it in that hour, make a plaster with the soothing oil to ease the pain of the hairs and leave some parts until the pain is eased and secured by aposteme chaut, then resume according to this manner as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the oil duct
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If the fistula is called an "arissati" duct: when you treat it with a fire cautery and according to the hot burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not well healed, then it must be opened at the site of the incision, and all the moisture that is in it should be removed, until the wound is clean.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the wound is clean, and you see the corruption and blackening, if all the instruments of this case are made in one form; and it is called an "astringent chief", and should be made firmly at the chief, and should not be pointed like a lime or as it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	When you grasp the corrupt bone with your hand, twist it between your two hands, and press your hand firmly until you feel that corruption is removed; and do this as many times as needed, then restore the limb using medicinal ointments.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is seen and cleaned, and the belly wound is seen, and it remains unhealed for more than 40 days, and it does not improve or become septic, and there are no other signs of infection, then follow this method to close the fistula: remove the bone the second time using a hammer and medicinal ointments, and if the wound appears to be healing according to this form, and the head of the bone is at an angle of III degrees, and the fistula is as narrow as possible, then follow these steps as you see:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	1. Then place the forceps on the bone of the arm, and gently move your hand away from the oil, then turn the whole forearm until it pierces the bone and feels the pain due to the patient holding their hand on their neck; and then restore the dry medicine leg as I have shown you, and when the child cries and hardens the legs, if the matter is in the neck; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	1. of the issue of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. When the wound is fully open and there is no drainage from the neck or amauision, if you examine the patient's arm, then the following should be done: first close the wound with a safe seal, then place a ventouse or haterel on it without hurting, then put it on the oil and the one made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then drain the oil, and apply it to the bandages and linen; if the linen is too wet, double each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the patient has used; then drain the bandages with hard bends, and resume the ventouses without hurting; then tighten the ventouses and leave the oil tightened overnight and in the morning, if you see that it has healed, that is good; if not, then after the day and night, remove the linen and the bandages and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Great dislocation of the eyeball
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a dislocation occurs in the eyeball, it opens and comes out like straw, and one can see inside; therefore, cover your eyes, and with a knife cut into the root of the part that is dislocated, then cut another one where there is a double thread of the part that is looser; and make sure to follow the first cut according to its position, then cut the double thread and take a part of the eyeball, and hold it tightly, then remove the knife and put some ointment on it in a large amount of oil; and leave it as long as the threads cling to the eye, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never leave the wound uncovered by the eyeball for as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs grow too long, if they are pricked at their base, then hold the eyes steady and do not move until they grow.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil's bag
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease known as "alcunnati" is not other than bags of oil that are assembled in the oil, appearing like a hot descent, and it is not hot; and the manner of the appearance of the dislocation if you make the patient sit at the side and straight, then take the chief between your hands of II parts, and pull the hair as long as you see the bag coming to the desus at your eyes; then it is like a knot, and does not descend and is not combed, and see the maladies things as they were; and if it does not descend, you should know that it is hot, and if the hair comes from the dislocation bag is not assembled as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient between your hands, then take the soft swab and moisten it with the corneal membrane I poc by continuing the conjunctive with the corneal membrane and the cornea, as long as the bow is in; and when it comes out, it should be distilled in the warm water mixed with honey, or hot and fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be cured by another remedy until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearance of the waters in the division, and when it is necessary to cut; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you place the oil between your two hands, held by the light of the sun, and make the healthy and tightened hair strong; then take the paper of the oil to your left hand where the hairs are on the left, or to your right hand where the hairs are on the right; then take in your right hand, where the hairs are on the right, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, where the hairs are on the left; then place the point of the instrument at the corona through the gristle of a tooth in the blenchor of the oil at the part of least pain; then withdraw the instrument called "almagda" gently, and use your hand as much as it pierces the blenchor of the oil, and feel that almagda enters the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda hole be at the edge of the measure of the espalance which is of the prunele just before the end of the nose; and this is the corona of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument where it has the aigue, then press the hole after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels weak now, if he sees the surgeon in front of him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a short rest, and if he feels stronger, open the second vein, insert the forceps with the instrument, and when it is firm and does not move, gently twist your hand a little at a time; then remove a few drops of blood, and cleanse the instrument with this.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply a poultice of oil to the wound, or if it is rough, make it smooth with olive oil and plenty of urine, and bind it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Our, and those who are of our kin, put on coats with much bread.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil does not enter the wound because of its hardness, as there are too many men with very hard hairs, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctive, and do not pull too hard, but make a small incision, then inject the oil, as we have said; and in the completion of the work, the patient should lie down on his back in the dark room; and should be made to undergo as many movements as possible, with light foods, and without moving his head to the right or left, and according to his disposition, then the patient is placed in this house again, and his eyes are closed, and it is shown that nothing else has been done, but it is necessary to do this before the incision now, but it must be done after the incision, because the swelling rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the patient is in pain, apply oil to the affected area before the seventh day, and follow the instructions of the person who applied the poultice; once calmed, remove the bandage and put on a clean one to cover the wound, and leave it in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then use the house poultice sparingly and gradually increase the amount, and advise that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Then some came from the land of Yrach who told us that in some places they make honey for the winter, but we have not seen it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in ancient books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of amalgam, for those who do not know them by sight; and they are truly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in three angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	of the cheek the nail.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times are born or grown with different cheeks, and if it has any that seem like scorpions at the mouth of pigs; and if it has such or is enhanced with fox-colored hair, and if it has bone-colored hair.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these cheeks which are not enhanced, and do not grow, it is necessary that you place the patient's face between your hands near the sun; and operate on his nostrils, and graft the horn on those cheeks, and pull them; for this is to ensure that you can hold it steady at the subtle point of a spatula, as long as you can see that the cheek is all one.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there is nothing else that can be done, and you examine all the strangers lightly, if it does not cause any harm; and if you do not overdo it, or cause an abscess, if it is malignant, then cauterize as quickly as possible and burn until the bones are charred and the flesh is black and blue or wet and sore.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If you do not cause any harm, and moisture comes to the palace, it is good that the patient is healthy; and if moisture penetrates as much as it should, it has caused injury to the bone in the leg, or the strangers cannot be trimmed: therefore it is necessary to cut a piece of linen about a hand's width, and it should be between each nail; and put the thick end of the linen thread through the nail hole as soon as possible, and tie it with odoriferous things as often as it grows out of the nail hole; and many times do this in the child's schools, and it is a light thing for those who see it; then hold the chief that comes through the nail with one hand, and the other chief that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after the other as we do with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Do whatever you can to ensure that the child's belly does not become corrupted with this charm, then cut off the boy's penis, draw out the blood, and moisten the boy's penis with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the urethra as before; do this for 3 or more times until all that is left of the charm is corroded; then put a cushion of plaster on some of the jaws for as long as it is healthy, and if you have access to dried herbs, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the child's belly, or when you distill the oils and medicines from it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a candelabrum, and you lead it thus; and if you see, if a candle is closed, and it has smooth sides to expel the grease; and it has a handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the char and the neck.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the head of the patient is affected with a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large, until it is seen when looked at; therefore it is necessary to cut at the beginning, and remove all of it, then use the cautery or hot medicine; and if it is delayed as long as it is large, if it is hard, of a dark color, poor sense: if it is not touched by iron because it is enchanted, since no matter how often it is cut, there is always great harm to the patient; and if the enchanted parts are not touched, they are not of iron, and you see that you can cover them, if you see the patient is pale and the malaide is cut, and cure the leu of things that are dry and restrictive.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the joint is cut and crushed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long, and it is rare in any man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to see if the wound is fresh at all its base; and then apply two leathers to a frame, and treat it until it is healthy; and if the lips are already inflamed on both sides, then remove all the parts that are sick as they heal, and then assemble the two leathers to a frame, and extract, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and incense burnt; and put the powders on a piece of plaster, or another plaster soaking, and leave it until it is dry, and treat it for the ointment as it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the seam is as follows if you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the speeches of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lips of the hands are often hard to speak, resembling grains of sand, and more or less large; therefore, you must turn the lips, and each time you take a nail, and hold it with pliers and press in each part; then use the lemon after cutting the vitriol beads, as long as they are not dried; and then apply the lemon oil, and cure the lemon for dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the horse's knee
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the knee cap has been treated with the horse's knee; what they call the "albulus"; if you can hold it with your fingers, and the bone at its root, and leave the wound or the sinus; then put on the leu vitriole broiet, or other powders that restrain and desiccate; and if the knee cap returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the bone is second time, and cauterized: if it does not return soon after the cautery; and these are the forms of the estrums for the horse's knee.
des sordens	of soreness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No times are gathered at the tooth's root, where the mouth is between the cheeks, gums that are ill and sharp; and no times is the black and yellow and curved tooth, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and it becomes the blackened tooth. If you must place the tooth between your hands, and its roots are in your holy hand, and you expose the teeth or the gums, as long as there is nothing more; and then I make black and green, and yellow and other discolorations, as they are exposed; and if this is in the first reason, it is good; but if not, it returns to the second day and the tooth, as long as you have everything exposed; and you must know that the teeth have a variety of shapes for grinding, according to what the demonstration shows, because the raser, whose teeth are exposed in other forms than those shown between the teeth, these shapes and others are with you visible.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you treat the patient's tooth pain, you delay as long as possible before eating and drinking, because it should not be hurried; for it is a substance of high juice, therefore there is no excuse for eating or drinking.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is forced to eat or drink, it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth's condition.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain in the patient's tooth has passed, and it is necessary that the tooth be kept clean and the food eaten; and it will not return the pain as long as the tooth is being eaten, because we have already done this for these healthier ones; and when you are certain about the tooth's condition, if it is necessary to scrape the tooth all around the gum; then wash your hands or use small tweezers in the first place and then as many as needed until they are well inserted, then firmly fix the tweezers; and keep the patient's tooth in your mouth between your fingers, and it should be held so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After severing the tooth with a sharp instrument, and if it does not break, then take none of these strings and pull gently on each end, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are felt and drawn out, then it is necessary to fill them with cloth, wherever they are loose; and if the pulling is done subtly with needles, so as not to break the pulled tooth; and it is wise to overturn the girdle to clean the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well aware that you will not break the tooth, and there will remain a part, and it will remain with the patient due to the malice of the root, causing greater pain in the first place.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	1. And you should know that you will not do any harm like those who, through haste and recklessness, break the chariot time and time again, but only cause further damage to what we have known; but they bring it about once by the agony of this great disease, either due to the roots that they sever, or due to the broken chariot that they cut, just as we often want; and if the bone is dry, wash the bone with wine or vinegar and salt; and if they come out of pain and come out, which often happens, use vitriol glass; and if it does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the wisdom teeth, or the first molars, are long and wide with large cusps, which do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large size if they do not break when pulled, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be teeth to hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth becomes loose when pulled, then you must put your thumb on the cheek side of the socket for one or two hours.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the root is not smooth, then you must remove the tines called "algefris," which are like the beak of a bird; and they should be made in the same way as a lime and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out through all these tines, then you must pull the tooth out entirely from the root, and insert the instrument called "athli", which means "palant", and its shape is like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be as large as possible if it does not break the bone, and if the root jumps through this, it is good; but if not, then use all the instruments, and the forms come after like this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument with two razors, its shape is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments that are before in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large tines, its shape is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And so it is that the bone does not break, and the tools are sharp like those of teeth; and also other bones, which are not as strong; and the masters make their instruments subtle by themselves, according to what their hands and the disease demonstrate, because they have some diseases or the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of us, and do not break the bone or other bones, or it is broken, if it seeks as fractures or other bones, or it pits, then you seek as I said, and I help with gestures, of which the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-held in the bone, so as not to slip, but can hold and open; and then restore the power of the medicine corresponding to this, and if there is any pus in the bone, and it is small, then this instrument can do all.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears to not match the natural course of the body, and its form is ugly, and at the same time in women with sharp teeth, it comes to be that you should cut off the tooth as soon as it appears, and it is not right in the jaw, and it cannot be soaked or polished: therefore cut it off. And if it is growing with the tooth, then use this instrument whose form is like the small beak, and it is sharp and hard like iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And quickly and quickly in the hands, for the hardness of the teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears to be like this, then you can limp, if the part of the leg is like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is as hard as the leg of a bird when making nails; and in the leg the teeth are lightly moved in the hands, if it does not move at all, then the end is without any rasping, and the tongue is too thin and it crops the tongue, if it can limp the spicery as much as possible, if it does not crop the tongue and does not corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth loosen by pressure or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on them with their gums where they touch, and you treat them with restraining medicines, and it does not work; if it becomes necessary to bind with a golden thread, because the silver threads turn green and rot, but the gold does not move at all; and if the thread is too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, take a golden thread and a silver thread double between the two healthy teeth, then place the threads between the diseased teeth, as long as you see signs of the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering where you left off, and gently and wisely move your hand until it does not move at all; and if your tie is to the root of the tooth so that it does not escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then fasten the head of the wire to some nails, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, and put it in so that it does not bend the tongue; and then leave it in so that it is as long as it can be, and if it slips, or the thread comes off, if it is pulled by another thread; if it stays and serves all of its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the incisors of the second healthy teeth and the second molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is loose, if it is reset in the gum, repeatedly, as we have said; and it does not become unstable unless it is sharp and painful, and never takes on the shape of a bone of a mare's hoof, and it is placed on the gum where it is lacking, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains so, and serves all its length:
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of the copper wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is the tongue that comes out of the mouth or naturally; or by accident of wounding; and the wires are such that you make the mouth of the patient open, and it has its head in your hand, and the tongue is relaxed; then cut the nervous wire as wide as possible, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it is hard or knotted, and it is due to pain, if the tooth bites it and cuts it large, and keep the wire so that the fingers do not press too hard, for the artery is out; and when you have done, if the tongue is red and swollen, or cold, then put the lingual nerve on a small piece of linen; and the patient will have a rash every night, that the patient can no longer endure.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the wound becomes infected, if it is not treated with vinegar, then the cauterization at the slow-healing cautery, which is boiled in this way, is done; then the treatment of another kind is carried out as soon as it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound appears to be colored or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is a gangrene; and if it is declining into a boil, and it has moisture, and it oozes pus, and it is made with a subtle spumous powder, and the discharge is from one side and the other; and if it is not treated in your care, then it is made with vinegar as much as it is infected, and then return to your care as soon as you have treated all parts; then raise the leu of silk and sealant, and the treatment of other treatments as soon as it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the mouth's abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never comes the gums of the mouth called "godaths", and they are properly the second molars, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healthy, keep guard: these are hard gums of little sense and fusse color, if not touched with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, if not touched with iron, so for the evacuation of blood; but let it remain as long as it is wounded, and then you will remove it; and if it is of a bluish color and the root is delicate, if you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first look at whether the gums of the mouth are resting and are calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and his head so be in your hand, and he open the mouth and let the tongue between his fingers, and press the lower lip tight all the instrument, of silver or gold subtle as some needles:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the lower lip all this instrument, and see the abscess, if take the bone and the flesh in the antelope, and drag the tail further than you can; and drag no thing with it, then the cope to the instrument, of silver or gold subtle as some needles, that seems some forces; and all the head is corbeled, and one place another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if it is sharp, then its form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be trenched on one side and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the hams, if you cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, put hot, warm water on the blade, and keep it clean, and if the blood comes out, if the blade is hot, or if the wounds of green pomegranates are cooked, or if the fuel of mirts are burned, and similar things, until the blade is not stained; then the cure until it is healthy; and never do any other abscesses appear in the mouth than the two hams, if you cut them as you cut the two hams.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with a stomachache that was not passing through the throat, which is to say it was of little sensation; and she had well closed almost all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the channel that was blocked, and could not swallow or drink, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the stomachache was so high that it had been pushed out by two wounds of the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then made a great incision in the one hole, and took out a large portion of the bowels; then I made another incision in the other hole, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue; after closing the hole in the stomachache and taking out a piece, and not leaving any suture behind, the woman was able to swallow water and wine, and began to drink again, and continued to cut away at the stomach wound for a long time; the stomach wound closed up, and filled the lower part of the belly that I had made, so that it could not swallow much; therefore I sewed and cauterized the stomach wound: afterwards she began to heal; and I left these parts, and only God can do more after me.
de l’uve	Of the uterus
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the uterus descends to the uterus, and it is elongated and called "perpendicular"; and if it is too large and rounded, it is called "uterus".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not benefit much, and you see that the incision of the gallbladder is sutured and made, and it is subtle, then it is appropriate to insert; and that which is rounded and not long; and it is bloody or has the color of blood or black, and it is appropriate to avoid the incision of the bladder.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For it poses great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, as you see, according to the method I have described, of the patient's strength and length, to place the patient facing the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then remove the nose, and pull it out, and cut off the two portions that I have mentioned in the incision of the two amandine bones.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much beyond the natural end; for if you cut more, it will hurt your voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two amandine bones, and cure it as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of pain, then it is necessary that you use an engine for the cauterization of the patient's pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way to cauterize is to make it sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head on your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and confirms with sharp, hot iron; and if it is not too thick or too clear, and in using this instrument, the shape is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a hair or puts medicine in his mouth, as the horses do with a bucket, and places the instrument in all the medicine on the eye; and the patient is anxious about his costeit, if the saliva and mucous from his mouth comes out of the medicine, if it does not go to the throat and neck, then hold your hand with all the medicine and press on the eye, as much as you see the relief and the pain of the medicine is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pull the instrument out of the cotton in the rope as much as the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five hours or six, if you have skill to restart the cauterization of the medicine, if it resumes, and after cauterizing the discharge enters the eye, wrapped in wool, and clean what is inside the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles as much as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision alone, as it involves cauterization. If it is performed according to this method, take care and use gut, rope, and chamomile and rue and mint and similar herbs, and put them all together or any of them in one pot, and add water, and boil; and it will be well glued with strong earth, and the pot should have the instrument according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or gold, and some of the points are inserted into the patient's mouth as much as possible when the vapor rises through the urethra, until the urethra is hardened; after that, it often resumes, until the urethra is dry, and do not make this at the beginning of the onset of gangrene, as many things come later; and do not do this if the onset of gangrene has already occurred.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a needle and sew the corner of the skin with a thread of lead; for the lead thread does not cause much pain to the mouth, as it does not pierce the flesh and is good for the patient's well-being.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened in the throat with a bone or fish spine, or nothing at all; therefore, if you must see what is there, and press the tongue against the instrument until you see the thing; and that which does not open and is stuck in the mouth, it is necessary to make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance, if the thing is removed through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and then wash it with water and then glutinate it; and when it comes to the mouth, if it is rough, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out of what we have said, then take the instrument of piercing according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	1. And let the forceps be placed on the gum if it can more easily enter the mouth, and raise the head; and warn that you do not touch the epigastrium, for all to remain still, nor crush the bone; and it is best that the patient and the instrument hold the device, because it is best or the thing is there; if it is held, or it is drawn further along the entire instrument evenly, as far as it can be.
de la sansue de la gorge	2. of the gum of the mouth
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	3. No time is medicine helpful for the gum, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not profit, then look at the mouth of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue to the device that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the dislocation, if it is all in one small incision, or if there are fine needles that are worth it for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If it is not worth it, if you take a hair, and cut it in the patient's throat, then cut or pull out the hair with force, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's throat is swollen all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full mouthfuls of cold water, and open the mouth, and feel the throat is being sucked in, and move it with your hand often; and if the dislocation feels pain, then stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If she does not understand as we have said, if the patient smokes opium, use the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, as it will feel tender.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation if you prefer to use either charcoal or coal, and it is placed in a cover over a hearth, and in the meantime the patient's head is placed on the instrument; then begin your fumigation, and the patient places the end of the cinerary in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not enter, but goes to the stomach; and the stomach will now be affected, and if it does not, if you resume the fumigation many times; and allow the physician to drink salty things and alcoholic beverages, and do not drink water; and then continue with the treatment as it was ordered.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it is, when it can be seen, resembles tines like corbels to enter the mouth; it has the appearance of a surgeon's beak, and has roughness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and then the form is:
li chapistres des apostemes	The cauterizations of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the cauterizations of the abscesses, according to what is remembered in this book, and are diverse in piercing and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its appearance similar, and due to the moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is if the bones are broken or they are in the course.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because the apothecary's wares are different from those of the foundation, and the apothecary's goods in the market are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if in the apothecary's wares there is not enough to measure, as long as the bowl is dead according to its completion; and if there are such that it is necessary to measure when they are thought to be, and do not die according to their completion, just like the apothecary's goods that are in joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess comes from a joint, and it is left until it is fully inflamed, by chance if the tissue and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is caused by contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is from the main member, and if you delay the puncture until it is mortified, it will harm the principal member; or if it is from the foundation, if the hole is not made as soon as it is mortified, it will cause the abscess to become larger and the fistula to open, and it cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	1. It is necessary that you inspect the hole of the abscess pustule that bursts according to the completion, and it is when the pain is eased, the fever subsides, the alleviation of pain and injury, and the debate and ague of the pustule's pain and wound, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sure of the hole or more dependent on the pustule of the abscess, and where it has opened; and it should be the length of the pustule's course, and if the pustule opens in the hands or fingers, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all cases equal or without inflammation.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those places, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the body, if it is found to be infected, then you should leave the puncture until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you do not pierce it before this, and the corse comes out of it, and it is painful to the mouth; and by chance they harden the lips and become flat on it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is found according to the size of the corse, according to what the member can bear.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to remove small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and multiple furuncles according to the appearance of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that have turned yellow and become suppressed, and they become as hard as I describe when they are young, and it is necessary to make them in the same way as buboes: and if there are such that are cut at three angles, and if there are such that are cut like the thorn of a myrtle, as abscesses of the gout; and if there are such that have a round opening and other openings and appearances covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	1. The one who lacks a guide, if it is only a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you open it gradually; and when the abscess is large and has a great amount of pus, and it has been opened, but not all of the pus has been drained, then open it, but do not drain all of the pus at once, but only a part; then the abscess will pass to the other side, then do not leave any part untreated; repeat this several times until all of the pus is out; meanwhile, if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman is carrying, or young children, or old men with decayed limbs.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectors have never once experienced the end of the bowel, by chance died the patient, and you will not believe it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have noticed your abscess, if the wound is large, look at the size of the abscess; and if it is a small one, if you can sew it with linen or cotton threads; and if it is large abscesses, and they are discharging pus, then tie each one with a thread so that one may run against the other; and if you have cut into leather a part of it, and you have shaved it off, then sew it with fine cloth or ragging of linen threads, and sew the bone and the dressing as soon as it is dry. Then the stitch, and the care of the ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the wound gets infected in your work, if you don't take care of it properly and let it get worse, it will spread and become more serious.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound persists in your work, if you don't take care of it properly and let it get worse, it will spread and become more serious. If you have any doubt or fear, you can apply the remedies I mentioned in this book, such as wine, oil, or vinegar; and if it is infected, then you should apply ointments made of wine, oil, or vinegar, or oil, to keep it clean and healthy. Then, remove the dressing and the discharge, as needed, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this comes the knowledge of all cures of abscesses: or you have said how one must come before the cures of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	and desires.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When many abscesses come and are like us in their appearance, as the grape of a vine, and have similar shapes.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It has the appearance of fat and such as is moist, and like pork; and if it is such that is hard and sharp in cutting, and does not have any doubt, then it will not be reversed.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting if it is that you strive with all instruments that are called "dissecting," whether the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they are made by long, thin pieces.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is seen, do not leave the hair that contains it, as it will come back again when left alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian linen soap, if present; otherwise, use soap and water, and clean the wound, and leave it until the next day; and treat whatever is damaged.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then continue the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the wound, as long as you can see that it does not hurt much; then treat the wound with ointment according to the instructions, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the grip holds for a long time, if the force is according to this form, it will cause pain; and your bones will break, and they will be burned from all parts, and all your care will be to draw out the wound or the arrow; and if the artery is opposite, I will do what I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if the grip is tight, and I cut and cure it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	The cut follows the grip, and if it is too tight, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these grips or hands there is no moisture, and those were the grips I made or held from an old woman; and I found the grip as a sharp, rough, and bleeding wound, which could not be cut; and if there was none, it was as good as a cut, as a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other cases, when the head is affected, it is important that these who come for the children and their roots be opened as soon as possible at the most dependent part of the ear, to see the bow; and they are treated according to what is necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times the abscess appears at the collarbone, and the seals are removed, and the wounds are cleaned, and never have they come from another part or been torn, and they heal, and one is joined with the other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each case of scrofula is properly located on the side, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofula are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	It has teeth that contain moisture, and if they are evil, they will not obey nature.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	If you see good disposition in the garter, and resembles the color of the corselet, and is even on every part and not too thin as nerves of the arm or the vessel, and is not too rough; if you cut it with scissors, and burn it from every part, and are the lips of the knee as the knuckles, if you have the skill, as we have said in apostles, and the thread is short and short, and you are sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and are not too rough with the fingers, and do not cut too soon, that your hands do not slip, and do not see too far ahead, that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you prick the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol beads or any powders that adhere to sinus, and stretch the wound; and leave it until the abscess is relieved and the wound is soothing, and dress it with a poultice.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	If the wound is not healing, and it returns to its place, as soon as you finish; then wait for your next appointment to see if it develops any small scabs, such as the lip and chin.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If the scab is large and deep, then only cut out that scab at its root, but leave the surrounding skin intact and let it heal naturally; then apply a piece of soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound, and cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, if you assemble the two lips of the cut, and hold them now, then there will be no excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand that you need to cover the root of it and treat it as we have said, then hold it now.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those wounds that have superfluity, if they are pierced or cut open; and if they are pierced like the one mentioned earlier, then the wound is treated with ointment and similar things, so that it does not become corrupted; and when the wound is well dressed, if the cure of the ointment causes char, as much as it is healthy.
de squinance	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautiere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'ils sont lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squinting, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglotis" be avoided; and this cannot be helped by it, because all the veins and the humor of the patient are in those who have chaw in their mouth, or in the throat, or in their tongue.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the hard palate, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to cut it in three or four small slices, between the two circles or through the quantity of the cut, and not in the cartilage; and then it is possible to section the epiglottis without damaging the throat, and the veins are long and free.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	1. If the masters are unable to extend the jaw, then spread the skin of the neck all the way to the chin; and avoid the veins of the face, if you see nothing, and then cover the wound as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the flesh that jumps out from the broken bone in the jaw, and due to the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. When the hour has passed, if you doubt the traction, assemble the two lips of the wound, and count all the soul that feels the cartilage; then administer medicines that make it healthy, as long as it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim advises that as long as the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is unconscious, and there is no pulse, then proceed with the dislocation.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, keep the epigastrium because the patient cannot breathe, and they only breathe through the wound, and it is commanded to leave the wound uncut until the poison of the disease has passed, which has passed in three days or four. Therefore, it is commanded to cut the wound and treat it as it is treated; and I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see a maiden prist I cutting, and she had a piece of cloth in her throat, and part of the wound was exposed; and I was called to cure her, and I found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and I find the blood that came out of it, and it was well that she had no vein nor led only the throat, and the blood flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and examined the wound, and I cured her as soon as she was healed; and she only fainted for lack of voice, and returned later to her senses; therefore I say that in the tailoring of the epigastrium there is no great pain.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large jaw
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernias are called "hernia of the jaw," and are large hernias in a reddish color, and are often found in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; and natural does not have an engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is in two ways: one is like fat, and the other is like hernia that comes from the artery; and if there is pain, and it does not matter if it is small or large, and the proof and search are throughout the introit: if you tighten as I am fat, and cannot at all, if the cope, so as to comply with the whole coif, if it has none; and carefully examine all, and cure as it should be, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	The first sentence to translate is
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of being born, which I will explain all the appearances; and it is necessary to know the difference between a normal delivery and a difficult one.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is characterized by chills and fever, as long as the fever has not passed, and the milk has been produced; therefore, the fever and the chill subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the newborn there is no fever or chill, and it contains sweat, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the face, and changes like a blister, and becomes large; and they are according to the appearances I have mentioned, either green or moist, and the color is so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	The text translates to: "It is necessary, when you come to the patient's care, that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments called 'entromissoire', according to what their form brings or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The text translates to: "The manner of examining the wounds of the body is that you press or add more moisture to the wound than you remove in the wound, and turn your two fingers as much as you can feel the stitch, then according to the size of the wound; then take out the entromissoire and hold it steady as it slips.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	1. When the joint becomes moist, it turns white, just like the other abscesses; and if no inflammation follows, it is thick, so it is cut in a cross shape, and it is taken with pincers, and the tip is lightly burned at each point and the wound is washed with clean water; and if it is not washed clean, it is done in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	2. If it does not remain clean, it returns to us many times; and if it is exhausted, and it does not grieve, if you apply some corrosive powders to the wound, tighten the wound, and put soothing remedies for abscesses on it, and cure other wounds as much as possible; and if it becomes large, if you cut off the lips of the wound, and cure the one who caused the injury.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	When the vein is opposed or another part if it hurts and you hurry and use the glass leu of vitrol, and leave it for II to III days, as the wound burns, and rest the heat of the sanc; then return to the copper that it is needed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the dislocations, and there are three kinds: large and long and small; and they are called "alabar" in three, and "breb" in one, and they are also called "alabar" in three kinds: great, long, and small, to encircle the fistula apertures; and they are like the beaks of birds that are counted, and they are of brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable than those that are black, to encircle the corbeurs of fistula; and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the purulence of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	1. The forms of the claws are like mirrors, as you see: large, medium, and small; and if the claws have II corneas of III kinds; and if the claws have III corneas, and they are of III kinds; and if the claws have II corneas, and they are not claws, but only one cornea, and they are of III kinds; and all these are necessary in their legs.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	1. The heads of these are sharp, and of such a kind that none can cut harder than one part, which burns the nose, because it does not touch the vein or the nerve; and these intromittors are returned in forceps, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: large, small, and middle, as you see; and they are never used except in the legs, jaws, arms, hands, fingers, and toes, and in similar places; and never made of another instrument, which resembles the cuts of forceps, according to this form, although it is sharper than lancets, according to this form.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed on none of the limbs that are strong and healthy, and have veins, and never return in this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never do the breasts of other men swell when they are exposed to corruption, as if they were female breasts; and they become lumpy and bloated, and those who see them cure them, if it comes to following this form of this line: .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scarify the fat, and apply medicinal fire to the wound, then sew the lips of the wound together as tightly as possible, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if the breasts swell and become lumpy like those of women, if they are placed in the wounds, according to the appearance of the wounds; and if one holds the other at the end of each, so that the smaller line contains the larger according to this form, from this line to the line .g.; then scarify the skin that is between the lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not all made, because the flesh does not rest, or because of the decay of sanguine, if it comes to filling the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it as long as it drains the pus and fat, then cure it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest chap
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Car en l’ovraige de cest chapitre, il y a souvent des evacuations de sang lorsque on ouvre une vaisseau sanguine, et des incisions d’abscèses, et dans le traitement des plaies, et dans l’extraition des armes, et dans la ciselle des pierres, et des choses similaires; où il
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Cependant, les apostemes qui contiennent du moister doivent être copés en fonction de cette forme, de la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et quant à toute bowe qui est dans l'aposteme, si elle est vuidie, on utilise la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jour, puis où tout le coton est sournoye, et cure d'oignement en commencant ainsi que le bowe est sain.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	When the abscess resembles scabs, if it is as we have said in scales, and the wound is raw and bleeding, then cauterize it as we have advised before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery ruptures, and the blood flows out, if it happens repeatedly, and also the vein is emptied and bleeds; and if the congestion occurs on the artery, if there is pain in it; and when you feel it in your limbs, if it feels tight; and when it is from the vein, if it is deformed and angry and out of place for others, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. It is necessary then to avoid the use of iron, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is bound by the veins made from the skin; then cut the tail as you would a rabbit's, and withdraw the artery as far as it is discovered; then take a needle and pierce it on the other side, and draw the artery through two threads, according to what I have shown in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then point the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as much as it does not touch, and let the flesh be which it has; then apply the cure that is coming from this, as long as the wound is smarting; and if the wound is through the vein, then when you see the blood come out of the vein, take in your hand what you have for the aposteme, and bore the needle into the part you hold with your hand, and draw it, and if it has double threads, so that you draw it from the other side; then close the aposteme, as I have said, or the thread of one of the two parts of the two threads; and if you doubt that the threads do not come out, then take another needle at the end of the thread of the first needle, and draw all the threads through the aposteme at the incision of the first needle, and draw the threads tightly; then close the aposteme as much as the superfluity does not come out, then close the superfluity and leave what is joined; then put on a loose cloth in wine and oil, then apply cures of tents and ointments as much as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	1. This often happens with assistants and you should do it in all joints, and that is the main cause of pain, and its color resembles the color of a corpse, and it is more prone to dislocations; when it is stretched, it causes pain, and it is not as deep as a corpse's wound, but rather like a thorn; it is always tense in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, and the one who is in joints cannot endure pain: by chance, there is contraction; and those who are at the shoulder or front, make the skin sweat.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If the swelling is small, and it is tied with nails, and the gauze is wrapped around; and if it is large, and the pressure is on the bone, and burns it, then the bone and assembly the wound at the stitching, and the cure until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	Heavy ears hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No time ever comes in the belly and does not affect another part of the body, and it is a disease called "funge" by its appearance of aus, and it is located at the root subtle, and the head is large; and in it there are many and small parts; and I saw one who had two bellies that were more like funges than anything else, and they had no difference, they were white, had a thin root, and were infected, and they rotted due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces heavy, and in the other VI Z., and the incision should be made if you look at whether the patient's face is moist, and the color of the artelus is blainche and moist and of subtle root; if the copes are large spatulumile, and they are in your presence, the cautery with fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the cauterization, there are often large dislocations of blood, and if you do not heal it, then you must cauterize; and if you see the patient bleeding and unable to bear the incision, then take a piece of clean cloth well made, and around the wound, tie the thread as we have said, and leave it loose; and then restrain, and do not stop pulling the thread until it covers the wound, and feel it with your hand; and if the roots are large, then pull them out as soon as possible, but do not pull too hard on the belly, then cauterize so it does not rebleed; then cure the wound, and keep the tailor from covering the ulcer that is of a foxy color and poor sensation and thin milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted gums, and I will come to treat this sore after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth is full of food
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the mouth comes from burn or cut of gum or scarification of face, and it is in the belly and there are some of the feces, if as in other ways, or of gut which is cut from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of ventrite; and if it is by the rupture of gum and the issue of feces, then the color of the ulcer resembles the color of the corse, and it is light thing with pain, and open of diverse issue.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed on both sides, it may repont, and then returns, and by chance it may be aggrandized, and grows large at the entrance of the bath and with much effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand; it does not constrain you; and if it is due to sand, then it is opened by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and is filled with a certain quantity; and if it is due to gout, then it is sore at the point, and the appearance is that of the sand of the artery, or vein, or gout.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you allow the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of sutures and for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of sutures and for the artery and vein, then command the patient to touch their abdomen where the wound is, and extend both hands, then squeeze tightly with both hands, then go around the leg that you have signed for all the stump, then make half of the suture at the end of the thigh, then tie it with a strong cord or a strong cord tightly, and make sure the half of the suture is not twisted, and if the intestine is caught, then release it from the cord, and pull out the intestine from the side of the stomach; if you catch the bowels, then take them with the cord, if they are not loose, then pull out the bowels through the anus, and remove any excess; if the artery or vein is opposite or the urethra, if it goes in, then return to your work and take two hooks, and pull out two strings, and pull out the two hooks as you think you are doing to see; then tighten the suture in four points on the hooks, and if you see, then the hooks, and leave the leg as much as it hurts, and cut the dead part by itself; or if it is subtle and hurts, then do the cure for what you have said, and cover the wound with the suture or the moisture that you catch, then cure the leg of what you have said, and cleanse the wound with the suture or the moisture that you catch.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the appearances of a chancre, and it is noted that it must be overcome by medicines, and it is noted that iron must be used for the cure; and we say that the chancre is engraved in the marriage, and great caution must be taken in its cure, and they tell the old man that when chancres are in the body or can be treated if they are like those that are in the mammary glands, and in the fissure, and in the resemblances of them, and it should all be done when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, if not able to approach it, because I have never seen anyone cured; and no one has ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The operation, when it is in the body or can be opened, is that you never purge the patient with black salt; then make it healthier if there is clear fullness, then cut the salt in half to make the operation; then your bones or gums become wet, and all the hair falls out, and the bone of all parts feels nothing left; leave the vein completely empty, and press well with your hand or any thing, and if they dislocate after being cauterized, so that the unstitched parts are not infected; then another cure is needed as soon as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first line of the text is "de ydropis
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence of the translated text is: "We have said in the division the appearances of edema, and how the assembly of the fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is only; and one should not touch fire in these two appearances: this is to say, tympanites and ophthalmia, because it is a mortal thing; therefore, when you treat the edema appearance called "edema" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you see that the patient's condition is weak or if there is another disease than edema, then if you do not touch fire, because it has doubt; and if you see the patient with strong vitality and only edema, and it is not too little or too much, then you should oversee: gently place the patient in your hands, and press the abdomen as far as the neck of the fever, then take the spastemill according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so we proceed with the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And so, proceed with the second part.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver snake, and is light or flexible, and in its part closest to the navel, there is one small puncture; and sometimes it costs three, and at other times two, and one; and the head is cut so that it resembles a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the head of the sword is the handle, if when it is inserted into the grip, it now comes out of the instrument; empty the part that is most or third, for if you see more than it should be in that hour, by chance if the man's spirit of the weapon has resolved, or he has fainted, or he is approaching death; but according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of his virtue mean, and his pulses; then remove the instrument and hold the grip, and it will be held now by the part that is swelling the puncture that was made at the point, as I have spoken, so that you perceive this manner; then resume the sword the next day, if you see the man suffering thus, and take a small quantity of blood from the grip; do this every day, and keep yourself from fooling as long as it does not matter but a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	1. If you doubt the patient's condition, and they refuse treatment, then the cure for the grave is either burial or sand baths, and perhaps a bath or sunbathing, and it will turn red; and the cure for drying medicines as soon as they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the boil, just as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	2. of the removal of the tooth
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	3. No child is ever born without having a pustule in the gums, or if it is small, or it is not present in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the patient insists to the point where they cannot perceive anything at all in this manner, according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the catheter subtly and hold it in place for three to four days or five, and when you see urine coming out, if it is closed, catch the urine and then put it back. And by chance, no one comes out, because the urine that comes out does not leave close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the catheter is small, if it is medicated with a small plug of cloth, as we have said, if it enlarges.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the catheter in their groin are bleak, because no one has ever had a catheter in the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate before they do not lower their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because of this, because the material does not come out at all, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the manner of the incision is that the patient feels pain on his back, if it is done on the back, it is the head of the thigh and the tail as big as a pen, if it pierces the skin, if it comes, if there is inflammation from this wound, and cure the wound as soon as it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	2. of pustules of the thigh
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. Many times, boils come in the thigh, and it looks like a bad appearance; and among them are malignant and non-malignant; if you prescribe them to be removed at the subcutaneous level, and cut and clean all, then put on cotton wool moistened with Egyptian ointment; then the treatment of ointment diaconticon as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the boil is malignant, of a dark color and suppurating, then you must perform a cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	After you have cauterized it, and the boil is still growing, and has both hair and flesh, then you must remove the part that was hairy; and if it is healing, then the part that was fleshy.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you remove it all together, if you do not feel the head of the boil, and it becomes black and corrupt in the boil, then everything that is black and corrupt must be cut out; then apply honey and flour made from the scraps of grape vinegar and vinegar, and continue the cures as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood flows from the wound, then apply the fire cautery according to this form.
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	If the wound bleeds, then apply the fire cautery according to this form: it is knowledge, at the stop of blood flow, and at the corruption; and if the head of the thorn is corrupted and retracts, then if you bind or lead the thorn with a cord, and piss the mucus among; and when the thorn arrives at the root of the thorn which has not been circumcised, or has come from a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the instrument broom, as long as the roots are slippery, and release the thorn from the root of all parts; and if this is difficult to do, then scrape the thorn with the spatula of any part of the thorn and the tip; then draw a thin layer of wet linen over the wound, so that it does not get infected.
de la circoncision	The first sentence to translate is "de la circoncision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not less painful than other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and for the sake of our children, it is the best work that can be done and the most gentle for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not call circumcision their sons' wounds, because they did not use it on their own children, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and physicians who performed circumcisions inside the house, with force, and on all occasions; if it were not for the reason that he has the skill and can do it well, and by chance if he does not have the necessary tools and does not know how to do it.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	When the wound is closed, and there is double pain, and in the mummification, which is not secure at the point of the sore member; and in the mummification of the toe by chance, the iron pierces the vein, and burrows into the flesh, and many times it does not have a proper mummification, and I want it to be.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mummification which is made with force, all the thread of the line has found its goodness in the experiment, because the forces cut both as well as not.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if it fits perfectly in I all the strength you have; but that the thread is well stretched out on the skin; and that the first dissection is done with the right scissors, if you think the child will understand that you only cut the thread to the verge, and so do it in all the ways you can think of; then cut the thread straight between your hands, and pass the forces between your hands or else between your fingers that the children do not see, and no other strings; then bite your hand on the verge and blow or sneeze, and lift it up as high as the chief of the verge is assembled, then mummify well the dung which is assembled, then tie the end of a double thread, then tie the other line to the double thread, and tie between the two lines, and gently lift the curved part and draw out the knot of the chief of the verge; then leave the sac open and closed, because it is the most beautiful; and sprinkle powder on both and put powdered glue on a moistened piece of cooked pork cut into small cubes, confit with rose oil and fresh, and leave it suspended in the other jar, and the cure is done as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The first line of the translation is: "The form of the forces at the world's end if it is this: the two heads are thin and stretching, and the heads are as large as the hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The second line of the translation is: "The error of the world's end if it is when the edges come out of the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, as the face of the abscess; and it should be properly, and if you do not hold it with your nail, then the cope.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	The third line of the translation is: "And if they pass three years, and what is in the furrow is deflated, if it leaves as much as the abscess pus is calmed, and gently burned; if the cope is as you hold it, and you keep from the part of the furrow, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient should treat the wound with something unsullied, as we have mentioned or dealt with powder, and if it does not heal within a certain measure, it will worsen; treat the wound as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	with careful retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If the urine is bloody, or frozen, or from the bowels, or from the small intestine, or from similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is discharged, and you see the retention by the urethra which is at the top or bottom of the bladder, then it comes that the female genitalia are bound behind the back, and the abdomen is extended from the part below the loins, and the female genitalia are restrained as much as possible; and then the urethra of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the urethral opening, because the urine is discharged; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the female genitalia feel great pain, then it comes that you administer extraction with all the instrument called "siringue", and its form is: and make a fine silver thread, as thin as the tail of a swallow; and make the cord of a palm leaf about a foot and a half long, and make it fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	The manner of the urine's exit if you take a double cord and tie it at the opening of the linen or cotton, and cut the linen with the thread of the umbilicus; and remove the excess linen and cut it at the umbilicus, then anoint the umbilicus with oil or burt and ointment of urine and urine of beef, and place the patient on the seat, and the vesicle and the verge moistened with oil and olive oil and German thyme; then gently place the urethra in the verge as it comes to the root of the verge, then double the verge towards the boude; then cut the urethra before it reaches the vesicle, and feel the patient come out the empty vesicle, and this is not a good thing according to this order because either you are leading or she will turn; then the thread is all through the linen poc and poc, and the urine follows the linen, then it is drawn out, and the urine is made up; and the urethra resumes as soon as the vesicle is empty and the pain in the patient is alleviated.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there is inflammation or blood in the bladder, or when an abscess forms, and you see water and medicines being distilled, then apply this method to all the instrument called "cleyser", and it is shaped like:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there are three pulsations of one part and two of another, as you see; and the medicine is such that it burns well on the skin without addition, if you can draw off the water and bind it when you are ready; and when you see your medicines gushing out of the bladder, put the tip of the clyster in the water, and draw it into the clyster which is ens; if you draw the water into the clyster, and then force it out strongly with the clyster, if the water enters the bladder now, and comes to the urethra, if that is the case, then the patient will feel the pain in the bladder: this is the form of a subtle clamp used to cleanse the bladder: if this is the case.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	1. It is made of silver or archaut, and the head is higher; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture you see clisterizing the bladder, then lay it between the two seals to form a double-layered pouch, and heat the moisture on the fire; then cut the chief off at the edge, then hold your hand on the bladder all the way through the moisture, as if the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and perforate it evenly; then pull out the strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle like an instrument, and put in what you see as oil, moisture, and astringent, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand as much as the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in division the ways of incision, and the extraction of medicines; and we said the difference between incision as rains, and those signs, and in which piere you must over in size; in the vessel, and in the verge; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision which is more often in the vessel is in children, and it is a sign that the child's water has leaped from the vessel, resembling its subtlety; and it is open, and great pain in the child's throat, and it can many times, and then grows; and then the wound heals; and is light the cure of children up to four years old, and is heavy in girls, and is as joints in boys, at those who are between joints and joints; and is the cure more light for those who have large wounds than for those who have small.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to the care, if we cover the patient first with a cloth, we clean all the feces that is inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never presses on the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the shoulders, and stand up and move downwards until the wound descends to the top of the bladder, and there is no blood at all coming out; then place him between your hands, and his hands are on his thighs if the bladder is completely bent over; then press and touch the wound; if you feel the wound in the space, then now cut at the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If it does not feel any pain, if your index finger indicates oil from the left hand, if the wound is healed, or if the cut is almost complete; then the bone in its foundation, and try the hole, and when you feel it with your finger, if it is at the top of the vagina; then press with your finger, and pull out the bone until you see it coming out.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the vagina with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand, and his left hand to spread the clitoris at the part where it is cut, then he cuts the clitoris with a scalpel, so that this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	1. And they come between the joints and the foundation, not to the cost of the opposite side; and there should be three on either side of the incision, and the tail should be either at the foundation or at the end, and it should be wide enough so that it does not tear, and it should be narrowed according to the size of the incision, not too much; by chance, if the pressure is needed at the foundation, it will jump with effort; and they check if there is any part that is pieced or has angles and margins: if it is worn out to come out; and if a part is tied, it resembles a girdle, and curves, from which the end is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A certain amount of caution is required when the joint has angles and margins; and if it does not give way, then you must pull on the nails that are as hard as a hinge at the head, to keep the wound from slipping out of place; or you may use a sharp instrument like a needle at the head; and if you do not manage to pull it out, then enlarge the pore with a sharp tool, and if it is not slippery, then use vitriol; and if there are more than one wound, then pull out the largest one at the top of the vagina, then cut it off, and then take it out, and the smaller ones afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is large, then it will cause a great wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out through the part that the physician cannot seal; but you must try to draw it, or cut it off with nails, as long as you can draw it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, if you employ the wound of incense and aloe and dragon's sand, and draw it, and put on it soft cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and pink rose and cold water, to ease the inflammation; then close the wound at the neck, and do not let the string come loose from the tissue.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you dislocate the shoulder, if it is well lubricated with oil and vinegar, then apply the ointment of final icon and basilic ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if the abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the vein, and it is retained in the urine, which is done in a certain way that does not cause the urine to jump: then you cut into the wound, and remove the pus, because if it remains, it will cause the vein to clot, and to bleed; then cleanse the wound with oil and vinegar and salt, and treat it in all ways that you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, you tie the thighs together, and assemble the medicines under the arm.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the prick is small and it is led by the vein, and it is checked often, and the urine cannot be passed; if the cure of this that I say otherwise, you must cut it many times, it is an excuse for the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have this proven in my possession.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will prepare to forge according to this form and make it at three angles in one piece.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the wire and wrap it around the vein on the other side of the prick, so that it does not get caught in the bladder; then bend the wire around the vein lightly, as it reaches the prick; and turn the wire in your hand at the prick as much as you can, until you feel the prick on the other side; if urine comes out, press your hand on the part where the wire is wrapped around the vein that is exposed to the bladder.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is so badly broken, and it breaks with urine, and the patient's gall is affected; and if you do not know how to do anything else, then cut off the head of the limb and the other end, then make a cut at the place where the bone is between the two tendons, then it comes out, and remove the tendon, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat as needed until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	of the female piercing
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There comes when a piercing is made in women, and if there is never any, then the patient's grief is great, and it is defended by three things: one is that by chance the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-behaved woman who has been disgraced as much as she is, even when she is cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	The third method is if by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth method is if the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it can be made more profound. And if necessary, mount her as follows: take a maiden well knowing, and with your left hand hold her by the waist, and if she does not hold you, then with a subtle cast, and the woman who knows part of the art commands you to do what you command of the inquisition of the wound; and look well at whether the woman is virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her duty or foundation and seek the wound; and if she is tightened, then she restrains her duty, and the midwife recommends that she puts her duty or con with the midwife, and wants and presses her left hand on the vessel.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the pain comes from the uterus, and it moves further and further towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the knee joint; then, cover the wound at the root of the thigh in the cold environment, and if it is not infected, and it feels the pierce in that part; and do not move the hand over the wound or the root of the thigh, and let it be the first small one; then bind the hand with a piece of cloth, if you feel the pierce as the wound becomes larger than the cut, and seek different types of piercings: this is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and curved, and those that have rains.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you suspect any strange appearances to know the end.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If you suspect any strange appearances to know the end. Then if it is not infected, put vitrol on the wound and hold it for an hour until it is no longer swollen; then return to your work, as long as the hole is healed, and have bandages as I said in the extraction of the hole to help you in your work; and if it is not infected and it is a blocked artery, put powder on the wound and bind it with threads and bands, and do not continue this, and leave the hole and do not touch it, by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is appeased, and it is read aloud, if one returns to their work, as long as the piercing is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Saltwater is nothing more than an assembly of moisture or white sugar, which contains the urine; and it is called "sugar" and has never been properly in the cloth of the bladder, if one cares to make sure that it is another bladder; and this is the leather between the white sugar that we have said; and there has never been any.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this saltwater is due to its being forced through the bladder, and it expands that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	When there is no percussion on the bones, and this moisture has many colors: it is either declining to jaundice, or without redness, or black, or white, and this becomes more; and these are signs of this assembly, because if it is white like we said, and the wounds are short, and it does not open the pores, as it has moisture throughout; then you should be careful with this gathering.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture within the own cloth, and the wounds are closed with a part of the dough, and they think it is other ointments; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the white sauce, then it feels well; therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, you should probe all around.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is dense.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, if the blade is sharp according to what we judge, then take the patient's flesh; after that, cut out the part of his back that is high and remove the fat from it; then, if it is his left side, command the attendant to cut on his right, and extend the finger at one of the two costals between the two ribs; then take the spatula, and scrape the skin of the ribs along the entire length until you reach the tip of the toe, and make sure your nail is straight in front of white skin, and scratch it gently so as not to hurt; then pierce the white skin of the large abscess at the large pertus, and remove all the pus, and then put your fingers, and set the white skin behind; but do not touch the ribs, but only the white skin, and scrape subtly from the costal muscle towards the rib, even if you do not do it well, if the pus returns to the wound; and if the child's leg jumps to your hand when you have finished the scarification, then tighten the two legs of the costal muscle in one knot, and treat it as you would any other wound, as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you suspect the male genital corroded by another disease, and doubt the suspensory veins of blood; then cut the suspensory string at all, and remove the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is assembled into two parts, as the branches; then cut the other part in the same way as you did the first time, then take out the sanguine, and put oil-moistened linen on the wound; and put another moistened linen in wine and oil, and tie it around the strings, and double the corners, and lay it on all the parts that are according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two threads, and use fine linen according to this appearance and they should be sewn together by stitching in the gore of the braies, and some of the points are placed on the back, and others at the part where the poignil is; and the other two chiefs at the two ends, and so all assembled is the restriction in the braid's loop; and never has medicine been used for this cautery in the size of iron, and it is that you prick the subtle cautery cultellare, and cut the leather of the couches, and so wash if as we have said, if that the white that contains the ague is discovered; if take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white with needles, and scorch it at this subtle cautery chaut.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	The patient should attempt the procedure in all possible ways until they are successful; keep the instrument from touching the urethra; be careful that this operation is more beneficial than harmful; and avoid causing damage to the vein, and do not make it too long or short, and if nothing else causes a problem, cure whatever does, according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is not confident in this procedure due to its horrible appearance, and there is a risk of perforation, as I have said, and if you are sure about the meanings we have mentioned that the incision is the way, then place the patient on their side with their legs raised; then pierce the abscess in the part farthest from all the surrounding tissue, and make the perforation as long as possible; and if the purulent discharge is coming out, then put gauze on the leg, tie it, and let the purulent discharge come out of the wound, and cure it as long as the wound is healing; and if the pus pocket allows the pus to come out of the mouth of the wound, then use a needle or instrument that is used to treat the pus of hydrops, or form it as it is in front of you; and enlarge the wound, and see if the pus returns, and it will be assembled after six months or until it comes out, and when it is assembled, it will pass the malaide's jaws.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the blisters
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Surgical procedures that in the section of this ramus cause fear in many cases, because I think it is better to leave it; and I will tell you the dislocations and appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that all abscesses come from wounds and blisters; and it is by case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known that the abscess is caused by sour and hot swelling, which is expanded in the blisters or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the wound; and there is no pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and sometimes there are grayish-blue and purple abscesses without any sign of artery or vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is about the artery, if it is cut by the position of the abscess, when you press on it with your two hands; and only then can you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is made of vein grafting is cut by its position at the expression of touching both hands, and can well make the size according to this appearance, and according to the others; and it is that you cope with the curvature of the bones, then it is the head in upper part, and the tail is white fatty, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the head.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the head is already gripped with these bones, then it comes that you turn the head, and it pains; and if it is in the fat, or in the case where the vessels are densened, then it comes that you deliver all of this tenue, and it pains around.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the child is from below, and it comes out all, and you pull the umbilical cord, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If your wounds are completed, then use the smooth linen oil and rosemary and vinegar for other cures as long as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the wounds
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a cessation of the abscesses wrapped in a wrapping similar to a glove, with the softening of the wounds, and the patient groans as it occurs; and the treatment of this disease is well done as this one before, and we will tell you about the wound of the patient according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you put the patient on his side, then lift the suspender from his shoulders, and adjust it to your two shoulders, all the way to the neck, and mark the masters, and extend them as much as possible; then cut through the entire vessel with a sharp blade, until they are discovered, and then burn each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries in the temples; then remove an needle or if it has a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein came, and tie it to the other end; then cut along the length of the vein, according to the size of the vessel, and in turn remove the corrupted moistors; then cure the wound as we have done with the others, if any bone is chipped that does not touch the vein, because this does not cause any harm, and all the bones come through the veins; if the patient loses his norrissement by incising the veins and seizing and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	The first sentence to translate is "de la routure dou syfac". The translation
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The translation of "de la routure dou syfac" is "of the dislocation of the shoulder".
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The translation of "Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac" is "And the signs are when it is a section of the shoulder".
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time does the circles descend with the intestine, and it is held in check, and great pain is suffered by the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with fire for pain, because it cannot be endured.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments with fire for pain, because it cannot be endured.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	For no time is it cauterized with white lime that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of blood cloting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the line as it is; and if it lingers at the wound, if it is washed with hot water, and what we have said is applied as soon as it bleeds, then cure the wound with another cure until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the joint where the vis is assembled, in the same way that you tie the veins, after slightly cutting them at the incision; then close it, and cure the abscess of that which operates, as long as the veins do not cease; and the cure as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No dislocation ever occurs in the muscles, as we have said, unless they are torn open; and no intestines are ever torn, unless it is a great tear, and then it is quickly repaired; and if the wound is too large in this point, it is believed to be a gash or a fissure, until the intestines are torn; and this happens by the extension of the abscess, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is made soft and compressed the limbs and the wound; and the cure is done by cauterization, as we have said before; and no cure is ever done in this way: and it is that the patient suffers great pain on his back between his hands, then cut the limb of the dislocation enlarged according to the quantity of III doses; and then take the plaster that has come off the skin, then put it on the limb appearing enlarged according to the size of the III doses, and then press the plaster on the abscess, then cut the II doses of the plaster appearing on the abdomen, then cut the one and the other; then take out the abscess, and do not cut the plaster or extend the wound, if as we have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then the cure is done by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the threads, if the wound is cleansed and cured as soon as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scar is unnoticeable, and the cauterization is painless in this part, and it heals quickly.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the hide of the hooves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the hooves have softened, because the horn that is cut is softened, and it can be seen; and it is the work of the physician, when he sees the wound being cured, to make the horse's horn on his back, and cut the softened horn that is on the natural horn; then assemble the two ends with a stitch, and if you see, first the excess of the softened horn is at three stitches or four firmly; then cut between the stitches, and cure it as well as the others wounds, until it is healthy, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	1. "dou chastrement" translates
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	1. "dou chastrement" translates to "harsh punishment" or "severe retribution". The sentence is saying that severe punishments are not allowed in our law, and I did not include them in this book; there are two ways to do it: the first one is to have the accused respond when asked about the crime and its cure, and the second one is because we often help some animals like sheep, goats, and mutton, and others by punishing them.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	1. "Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure." translates to "I therefore say that punishments are carried out according to these methods: either by attrition or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the process of attraction, we should make our seat the best in warm water, as long as the coition is softened and during; then pull them away from your hand, as soon as they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The process of austerity: it is necessary that you shave the best, and press the leather of the coigns to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each stitch at the cop, when you have well burned them; and leave no scratch on the skin and the subtle scratch that is on the veins; and this manner of austerity is more harsh than that which is made by attraction, because in attraction nothing happens to the coigns, but the best desires luxury; then cure the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	The first sentence to translate is "des hermofrodites".
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermofrodie is according to two ways as men: one is that it is when between the two parts of the body that are open and like the figure of a woman, or with hair, and never once in cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has as much hair as a virgin and the parts of the body.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of the throat and face is that you cut off all the loose hairs and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine escapes through the parts of the body, do not have treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the tenth
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is an artificial part that is placed on the natural part because it is too ugly to see; and no woman has ever had such a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you trim the superfluity of the tentigene on your hand or fingers, and lightly lift it; and do not cut too much, so that the wound does not bleed, then the cure of another cure as soon as it is safe; and a another char that is in the mouth of the married woman, and the employment, and by chance it falls, and it is according to the appearance of a kow, and for this they called it the ancient "kow's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it comes to your mind that you copy, as we have said the temptation, and cure as long as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erroneous
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is of the nature of the woman is not perfect, or the puerperium is small; and it is by nature or accident due to disease that came; or it is due to charlatanism, or secret subtle artifice, and is made in front in the marriage, or in costumes, or dress, or otherwise; and defend the conception and the childbirth, and by chance the flow has; and the knowledge of this if by the care of the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the head is pressed, then it will appear sooner or later.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the face is painful and swollen, and it subsides later, if you hurry, and the lobes return: take your two indices together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then they form, as long as the subtle face pain remains, and over the swollen ears; then take a linen cloth and some oil, and place it on the face, and rub the woman's face with your thumbs every hour, so that it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the face is hard and fast, then you should cut it like a sheet of glass.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the joints are cold, if the pulse is weak and the breath; and apply the remedies that cleanse the wound, such as honey, dragon's blood, incense, and a large amount of urine; then make a poultice of warm ointment, so that the wound does not stick; and leave it for a long time, and make another poultice of a dry linen cloth; then apply other remedies as needed until the patient is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when cold comes to the marriage, if it is desired to follow this manner, then there should be no enchantments.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the enchantment in the marriage that is in the cold, it should not be touched with firmness.
des emorroides	The first sentence to translate is "des emorroides
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes are wound openings that do not heal properly, and if they become too large, they can lead to infection; and we have said in the division of appearances and signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that wounds and ulcers, when they are exposed to the air, and it is not felt, if there is no cure by fire;
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the wound, can be felt, are those that can be cured;
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It follows that you should put the woman in a cool house, then take the heating ashen ashes, and cover it with roots, then powder some medicines restricting blood flow, such as those of ice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour water on her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if she has pain, if she comes, I make a decoction of sumac and the juice of crab apples and galls and similar things, and then take flour of oats, and mix with honey and ash, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it is dislocated, it is broken.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it is not dislocated, make the patient lie on their back and apply pressure to the shoulder; then take the arm, and mix the juice of plantain or algin with wine, and apply it to the shoulder.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is healed, treat the shoulder with ointment as long as it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles the spiciest chili pepper, if it comes out as I have said before; then treat it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	The first sentence to translate is "des apostemes de la marris". The translation of
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Multiple forms of abscess come in the marshes, just like chancre and abscess piercing, herpes, and fistulas and blisters and chancres and apostemes chaut, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that I treat the aposteme chaut that comes in the marshes, which is not different from other apostemes except for being larger; and if you see the symptoms of iron, then look to see if the apostemes are already at the beginning of its arrival, and signs of fever and chill, and if it becomes red, you should see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	For this reason, do not rush to perceive, but make the patient promise as soon as the pain is soothed; then place the patient on the table, and have two assistants hold him down while you support his back and adjust his limbs to align the leg; let his fingers be expanded, and put his knees against his thighs, and tie them well with a belt; then turn his face towards the left side, and bring the instrument that opens the mouth of the mare, and after that comes the form; it is necessary that when you see this instrument, you fix the first end so as to know the fitting of the mare's mouth, so that what comes through the instrument does not fit more than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if it is larger, it is necessary to cover the fitting of the mare's mouth with cloths, so that the patient is not grieved; and it is necessary that the instrument's handle be placed at the end, and that you draw the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess is opened and it is touched with warm water in the hand, if it covers the head, apply it to the wound; when the bowel is seen, if it is necessary to put shelled ointment in the wound, either in rose oil or green sesame oil; then place the ointment at the edge of the wound, and place it on the wound and the clean, slightly moist puncture point, until the wound is cured; then the doctor will perform two applications every day for two days, as long as it is healthy; never lift the wound and the ointment with a cloth soaked in warm water and honey, and then with warm or roots of lilies and Aristolochia, and then continue the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is treated with the marriage, then it comes that you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Childbirth is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman press against the bed, and desire to smell the aroma: therefore hurry the children from further harm; then you should know that these children are according to the natural figure, and they are from your loins, and the second is with him; and when you see these signs, it comes to gently press his belly, so that the child is soon; for when he descends from his head, if it is with the second one, and is monded by the marrriage of its superfluities through good cleanliness; and this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its own accord, and comes when the chest or shoulder is hurt, and the hands, or when it comes to the belly or side, and is converted by chance into the collarbone, and through other harmful figures; if it is skilled in the dance and subtle in these things, and warns against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how to help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born naturally, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her virtues are weak, if it is placed on a stool or by women, and the nature of olive or fenugreek is cooked, and then dance between its two little spatula, which is this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	1. And cut the second one, and hold it against its bone as much as the moisture that is being corrected; and insert the woman's belly as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clasp the woman's muscles with fenugreek oil; then apply and suture, and tie her mouth and nose for an hour: if it now delivers the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	2. And if the hands come out, then it is necessary to lightly reset them a little at a time; and if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the bed, and lift the feet up; then turn the bed over, and sew on the woman, so that she does not fall when standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then it is necessary to cut the hands at the corner that is before you, and take out the child, and reset it perfectly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the child's foot that has its toes
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child's foot comes out of its toes, if they can be put on high; and then the nail turns little by little until it is even; then pull the toes and stretch them a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	It cannot jump just like that, if it is commanded to, and I make it jump higher; if it fails, let God be blamed.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it cannot jump, as we have said, if the turn is small and small, until it is in accordance with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For therefore it is lightly done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it cannot jump as we have said, then take a light mace, and oil of sinew, and gum, and broth all in mortar; and make according to the nature of a woman's womb and deflate this treatment, then place it in hot tea until to the ribs; and when it is softened at the ribs, take the collier of iron, and put it on, and leave it an hour; then place it on the seat, then stretch the mouth and the nose, and press the stomach lightly, because the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the issue of the child from its bones
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if it puts its hands on its knees several times; then hangs by its neck, and lets its feet dangle, and then lies down on its belly; and folds its hands several times, and then presses its hands on its stomach, and pushes the knees apart as far as they can go; and if the child does not jump, then catches its feet and bends them, then bends the abdomen forward, then pulls its hands towards it; and makes the child lie down again; and commands the woman to pray as long as the child is like this.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the child's birth that comes out wide with a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I command the midwife to bring the hand: if she cannot bring it, then I make the woman stand and go; if she cannot go, then I make her sit on the bed and extend her legs; then I relax the muscles that I have mentioned; and if there is no child, then I make her sit on the seat, then study to bring the hand back; and when the child is born naturally, and it is crowning, and I command it to press as much as it can until the child is out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the child's birth at its neck, and its hands spread, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the bile stains your hand, then turn it slightly and lightly; when it is equal, if you put the natural oiling of the muscles and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves slightly and slightly; when you have done this, if you make it rest on the side, the command is to press; and the result is that it becomes softer.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way for all the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes in this way for all the second time, if the second time is caught in your nail, as long as the moisture is dry; and if the child can be placed on his face and neck, if the bile flows, it must not be held, and the child will die; then squeeze the child's throat as much as you can, when you have done this in accordance with what is necessary, and command the woman to press no time: therefore, do it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is said that twins are born many times, and never three or four at once; and this is a strange thing, and few have happened.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and never live long, I know that they are multiplied, and are destroyed by the face which is given them, which is like the bow; and they never issue naturally as all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born gently, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and made quickly and lightly what it does; and made like that which is worth salutation.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No children are formed in the marriage of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed as a child by the measure of the glowing sausage, and cover the whole body because by chance it resembles something else, if it is made according to this; if it comes out.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to cut with your hands; if it comes out that the woman is in good health and has no accident or death; if it comes out that the woman is leaned on her back and her shoulders are bent downwards, and her legs raised; and the midwife applies the teign of II parts, or she is laid in bed if she is not treated for the descent of the child; then grease the mouth of the mother with warm oils with musk and attar of rose and fenugreek and flaxseed, then grease the hands of the mother with these oils and musk; then blow lightly in the mother's hands, then take the leu or the bones that are flexible at this time, and take care that the bones are not broken when they descend from the head; if you find the bones in the wrists or in the neck or in the mouth or in the beard or in the chin or in the ears or in the temples or in the hair, and the child is born with its head down, then the bone is in the right hand, and put the cradle between the two fingers of the left hand, and blow lightly with all your hands, and do not forget the bone in any of these places that we have mentioned, as long as it returns to the empty state; and this is the shape of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then, look for the other bone, or the one you are most familiar with, if the extraction is equal; and then, the joint should move evenly when moving from one side to the other, by applying pressure, and the bones should be held firmly by the teeth, as in this case:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part breaks off, and there are no parts broken on the other side of its two bones, and the other part is pulled; and if it does not break off, then put this bone or the higher one, and do this until all the parts are out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be returned by traction, then it is necessary to wrap around as much as possible, until the whole is out; then the cloth is placed at the joint of the ankle or the knee, and you must do the same with the other hand, and tie the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	When the child's head is large and misshapen, or there is a sudden swelling, if it is necessary to cut between your two hands and remove the swelling; or you will do it with the instrument called "almidach", which comes with the forceps or chaper that follows after this; and then make the child's head naturally large; and then pull out the bones with the tongs, and if the head is forced and crooked, as long as the moisture is not too much, until it is straightened; and if it cannot be straightened, if it is broken in pieces at the mouth that you press; and if it is enlarged at the belly or hips, if it is necessary to cut as much as the moisture allows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is in its mother's womb, if it is the light attraction, and the nourishment is given to the mouth of the pregnant woman.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the child is in the belly or the pudenda, if it covers that you draw it out gently with your hand; and if the belly or the pudenda, as much as the moisture that it has; and if other members are osteit, and the shoulder is drooping, then the mother's hand comes to the mouth of the pregnant woman, and draws it out; then the foot or feet, and the draw is finished; and if the mouth of the pregnant woman is retreated because of aposteme chaut that has come, then there is no need for traveling, only for managing moist and heavy things; and the management emplaustres, and it is sliced into ague mollifying and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its chest, and you can put it evenly, then as we have said in the living child; and if there is no harm, then the part that should be left is the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the child is misplaced as we have said in the cases of abortion that come; and if the pains come, then if it is kept in a strict diet, and the child is misplaced, then other treatments are needed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another of this and was told that death would come to her also.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came some abscesses in the belly, and inflamed as soon as they were pricked, and began to make great heat.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought it would be long, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong astringent with great attraction, and after some hours, more and more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted the wound, and with my hands I felt bones as long as the woman got better; and the woman came to me, and it was dislocated a little from the knee; and I did not remember this chapter because when the master made an extraordinary thing, I thought I could help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocation back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, which is applied to the limbs; and then the head returns to its joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the corner should be more subtle and restrictive, and made of a flat or rounded surface; and the mouth should be no wider than the head's diameter, and the margin of the branches should be one and a half palms long and the other half a palm; and these joints should be firmly closed on either side, either half a palm or a little more; and these joints are bent in the mouth of the limb to open when turning the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	1. Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, can be made of flat or rounded wood, according to the appearance of the nails; and it has two handles, as you see, of a palm's length, and they are wide; and when you open the marsal with all the instruments, if you place the woman's hand on the lap, the pieces and the thighs together in the marsal, and hold the handle of the instrument between your fingers; then use your hand on all the instruments as you did with the nails evenly, according to the amount you see open the mouth of the marsal, until it fits as it was.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all around us, and its appearances are multiplied; and when we see them, the more they are, the faster they work, and the higher they are for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument because you have not seen it, for its needs are not easy to satisfy.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second child is retained in the womb, it comes to your command that you order the midwife to take hold of the hair, and then it is torn from the body, and your hands are forced to the mouth and the nose; and if it jumps for this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, then if I can, and make a poultice or gargle, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the patient, such as mint, rose, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, are either cooked or can be made into a decoction over fire; then put a cloth or gargle that can, and the other part in the mouth of the patient, and let it dry until the vapor reaches the patient; then it is made to be squeezed, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second dose is omitted.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and does not improve, then order the patient to massage their left hand with oil or muslin, and then apply it to the affected area, and repeat as needed. When she finds it, if she presses and extends her fingers gently and evenly, so that the nail does not slip during extraction, but it is recommended to move lightly to the right and left, and then pull. If it comes and becomes distended.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the tooth is very tight, we have called for the treatment of expansion and fumigation with herbs; and if she does not do all that we have said, then keep away from the dentist; but it is likely that what is in the mouth of the tooth, you will tie it to the woman's cooch, then clean it with antiseptic ointment; if it gets better and returns, and comes out; but all the same, when it gets loose, if there is a bad smell from the stomach and mouth, and the dentist is bleached.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it comes to passing fumigations, however, then: no of the ancients have proved fumigation of cresson and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is made with which the woman is fumed at the retention of flowers and the secondine if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a dog, and one puts the subtle head on the nature, and the large hairs above the fire; and it is the fumigations with charcoal, and the smoke as much as it is gray, and it resumes another one.
de percier lou fondement	to perceive the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not perceive the foundation, but the one who has understood is a subtle face: if it comes to the dance that he perceives this face at his turn, and does not perceive more of spatumile agut, and garse the plastering that it does not touch; then put on the smooth one in wine and oil, then the care of ointment as much as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not stay in place, if you put or pierce a needle into the skin, and leave it hands free, and it is quick when the children see it going to their rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never has this cautery failed to heal a wound or an abscess; if it comes to be cured, if you treat it, as we have said of the needle in the skin.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula formed by deep moisture
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from deep moisture are nodulated, and grow as fast as those that come from the edges of the fistula or its parts; and when this nodulation is old, it is rough and bloody or subtle, and never are these fistulas permanent; they are known by the fact that they are caused by egestion or ventosity when the patient has egested, and by chance some go in a jump.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that pierce the bladder, and a third of the vagina; and they reach the joint of the cuxe, and a part of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And if you cannot determine the location of the fistula, and it is not present: and you should end your index at the foundation, and cut a thin needle of iron or silver in the fistula when it has no bends.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there are bends, then cut a small tent of plonc or horse hair, as you feel the tent or the hair in your hand; and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of wind, vomiting, or bleeding, as we have said: be careful that it does not pierce; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the bladder or urethra, and the urine suddenly flows out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is present at the joint of the thigh, if it causes the testicle to twist and pain, if it is due to an accident and cannot be cured by rest or medicine; and in these fistulas there is no cure except labor and vanity of those who enter into them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not recent and not ancient, there is hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and if blood flows from your hands down your back; and you lift your legs up to your thighs, and they are bent towards your belly; then make a tent of rags, or a cloth if it has twists, until you see or the testicle comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	The patient feels pain at the base, if it comes to your attention that you have bitten your thumb or index finger, then it is perceived as a sign; and it should be discovered or felt between your fingers whether it is present or not, therefore pay attention to it; if it cannot be healed, it is not cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is not possible to heal all wounds, but this is rare; and if you can help, then do so, according to the size of the fistula; if it is as said before; and cut through the fistula as much as it reaches the base; and do this twice or three times, as you feel that these charges must be anchored, which are like a penny's tail; then the cure of rough wounds is made, as long as it holds, then the cure of ointment is applied and smeared.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in good health, so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is not in good health, so be it. If he attempts to enter, and cannot penetrate, and between your thumb and index finger there is a thick covering of cloth or soot, and you see the fistula open at this point; if the end of the fistula is at the beginning of the covering, and before the tent, and then cauterize afterward as it comes to the top of the tent; he will be delivered from the tent, and he will be cured. Then make the charms that seem like a pen feather, and there will be none left behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not serve you well, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire cauterization or medicinal heat.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauterization has two effects: it is known to secure these loose bones, and to stop the flow of blood and the moisture; then the treatment of soft tissues in the belly or in the groin, as long as the wound bleeds, and the burns are left in place, and the dried plasters are applied to the sores, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	When a fistula comes to be formed suddenly and is distant from the heart, if it is painful in the belly or fundament, investigate this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and if it is the uterus, or the sac, or the guts, if not it was but a sign of hope and expectation, by the administration of one of the three ways: if you cauterize as we have said, or if you cut it close to the fistula, or if you pull it out and cure as we have said; and do not pull too far forward, if you do not seal the part that holds the foundation, and let the exudations pass through the desired sense; then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it is cured, or you remove that covering and the wound then when it is sealed from the foundation, or by tent or another instrument appointed; then mend the char that is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the part that is further from the foundation: if it is still a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time have pustules been made in this manner: and when you reach the pustule with the tent, it is either costive or founded on a deep cavity of the skin, if you take a tent percée at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I blow it into two, and blow the tent all along the pustule as much as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persisting in the margin of the deep cavity, then withdraw the fillet from that pustule at its head; and take out the second part of the fillet, and assemble the two heads, and draw them together and leave one free, and do not restrain it again as long as the wires are caught between the two, and touching; then cure the wound as soon as it is sore and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, if you manage to perceive it in all possible ways that you can, it will not be too difficult.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make the fistula through the skin if it can be done, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny thorn, from which the fistula is made if it is long and thin, and on the other hand, not, because one cannot cope with it if one cannot do it, as you see in this:
des emorroydes	of emorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are caused by the foundation, like resin grains, and they have small and large ones, and they are cut off at the root, and they have one or more, and they are defecated from the foundation and the top of the foundation; but those that are defecated are few in moisture, and they are cut off with a little turquoise or a little wine, and they have the color of corns; and the cure of those who have caused the foundation to be defecated is that you command the midwife to let it sweat in chambers as long as the foundations are dry, and when the children appear, and she can catch them with her fingers or keep them in her nails, then she cuts off its roots; and if the uncinate cannot hold the moisture, you should take them to the side, or to the cloth, or to a piece of chamois, and then cut them off, and powder some hot powders that are in the leu of cauterization; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, so that they are cured by other cures as long as they are healthy; and if the foundations cannot be cut off, you should listerize the midwife with a lister mouth and sharp teeth that can be washed with water, so that it can be cut off openly; and if the midwife's mouth is not prepped, and the stitches are firm from the foundation, then it is the light cure; and if you prepare the midwife's mouth or fingers with the stitches, and then cut them off, and then cure as we have said, so that they are healthy, and they do not fear the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If it comes to pass that you must cut the seam according to this manner: take one thread, thread it through an awl, and then draw the thread through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the other thread over the awl, and if they are wide; and then tighten the thread, then knot it, and draw out the awl, and do the same to the rest, and leave the excess of the sanc at the bottom; then put oil or ointment on the foundation, and put it on the foundation, and command the patient to lie down; and then let it be as long as it is tight, and when it is tightened, if the cure for ointment and other cures are sufficient, until it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	The first sentence to translate is: "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to your attention that you need to resume at the point of a stitch or your nail scratches the skin, which does not allow it to moisten; then the treatment as soon as it is soaked, and if it cannot be soaked, then the cutting resumes more forcefully than before, until it heals, and is burned; then the treatment as soon as it is healthy.
dou fremit	It trembles.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A mosquito is a small appearance that must be present in the chest, and it causes trembling; and no time the fever arises, and it is felt as deadly trembling, and it comes to all the chest, and more than the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that if you take a nail of a goose's foot, or a vulture's claw, and put it on the pulley, as long as the purple circle encircles the pulley entirely; then turn your hand around all the nail as you cover the entire pulley, and place it in front, and draw out the pulley from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if I make this of a nail of an eagle or iron in this form, and it is subtle and transparent down there:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	You will not see, if you hold the pulley with both hands and press it; and if you see, if the cautery of the pulley is in front or after the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	The form of the fire cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never has it been done to clister with silver or archaut, or fused or hammered gold; and never has it been done to these strums, which are either small or large, according to the size they are obtained.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	When it comes to treating children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clitoris is small and large if it is wide, or the belly is shaped in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	If the clitoris has a division or the belly is divided, as you see, and the child's head is perceived, then it may be in one of the costals, and in the other, and the belly may be in a vessel of a beast or of parchment, and all around the small pertus, and between each pertus there must be a space of about an inch, then sew through these pertus with a strong thread, then assemble the belly like a cheese; and when the medicine is given, if it is held by the instrument before a strong thread, then sew; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of onion or something similar, then lightly apply the ointment; then the surgeon takes his two hands and assembles them as much as possible, until it is all done, then he removes the splint, and gently supports the patient's legs at the bedside, and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night, it will be more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you have a dislocation of the abdomen due to disease, and the medicine comes out, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the swelling is either at the base or the gangrene, even if it is as subtle as that of a child; and this is the form of the subtle cystula when it is drawn:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division of the cure of wounds; but you will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the instrument or the wound is made, and how it is made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things made by wounds are made of cutting and thrusting, or lance, or spear, or dart, or similar things; or they are made according to the size of the wound, whether it is made at the neck, or at the shoulder, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the shoulder, because the memory will come to your chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or chief, and the bone is not broken, if it is due to grief of pierce or similar things, and the skull is completely shattered and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of apoplexy: if the same head is healthier than the affected part itself when there is little blood from the wound, and it is healthy on the opposite side; and avoid the physician's fullness with wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not seem healthier, if his flesh is anemic, and does not drink wine, and does not eat meat; and puts the wound, it is best to apply ointment or oil rose only, or steeped in vinegar; and if it has not bled, if it is placed on the wound, it is fresh at all its source, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say a little later; and if it has been moved, if it places some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	When the wound is large like that of a spearhead and its surrounding skin, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be reassembled by stitching, like I will say for belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	When the wound is exposed to the bone, it may be, and only holds by a small piece; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hardness in the leather of the thigh, and instruct the patient to eat large amounts of meat, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you wound or burn the flesh, and it does not reach the bone, if the burn is total and grows worse, then treat it; and if the artery has been cut in the wound, and it cannot be restrained by medicines, if the artery wants to bleed, and you loosen the cord, if the wound is small, and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put on this powder which smells like the herb that was used.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take a part of incense; mix with three parts of dragon's blood; and three parts of alive chalz, and the fine powder, and apply to the wound, and draw it out as it adheres and joins to all its sanguine; and then it is well if it does not ooze, because one does not want to take the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never has it been done with only chalz, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has not been moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is infected, it should be treated immediately with this powder; but add a few digested ointments or flour made from barley and honey, until it becomes soggy; then treat other wounds as necessary when they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	When the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if it is extracted with fine tweezers; and I will tell you more about this later in the bone fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the small wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes of the collarbone and it is simple, and there is no difference between it and the small wound, but if the collarbone is injured or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	1. If it is a nerve, and there is no other remedy than leaving the treatment alone and not putting anything restrictive on it, as nerves draw back; and do not put anything on the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of this is with the brain, which is the colder member; but if the medicine is salve, like cool water washed chalz, and mixed with rose oil, and cucie washed in cool water, and other pierces made in this way, and moistened ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, and the cost and lie of bandages, then the cure as soon as it is sound.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	When the wounds are healed and the skin is full of blisters, if the thorn or lower limb; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from the wound, if it is treated, and the bandage, and cauterization is done; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the jaw, and the guide is kept, as the meat goes, if the jaw is under the throat's nape, and does not touch the neck but is put back according to its natural figure; then the dislocation is reduced, and some joints are left, then the care of wounds is discarded as soon as it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if it wants; and if there are pieces of bone, if they are cut as much as possible, and those that cannot be cut, if they are left, so that the wound does not become infected and is healed and becomes healthy; and if the wound is fresh, if powder is applied on the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has in the wound bone and it has an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is of the wound of the arrow or the spear, and the wound is gushing blood, then look at the wound's appearance: if it is mortal, then the bone is broken; and if it is not gushing blood, and there is fresh blood all around the vein, then do not delay in applying powder to the wound for the first hour, and do not leave it without applying more powder until it stops bleeding; but if you do not have powder, then apply a mild ointment and lay two cloths on the wound to absorb moisture; and if you do not have an ointment, then put cotton on the wound to soak up moisture, and make the patient lie down on the wound for three or four hours, or more, until the spasms and tremors of the chest are restrained; and when you see the bones in proper position, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	1. Treat the wounds and other injuries as best as possible; and if it cannot be healed, perform surgery with clean tools that have been made; if the treatment is necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	2. If the wound is a cut with a knife or a needle, and it is simple, either on the front or back, if the treatment is done by the surgeon in front; if it is large, use bandages; if it is small, use powder; if it is infected, and the pieces of bone are exposed, if necessary, cut out the pieces of bone; and if they are not exposed, leave the wound open, if the extraction of pus is allowed; and for other wounds on other parts of the body, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of "dou derrompement dou ventre" is "great abdominal pain".
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no damage to the intestines, and it is not a difficult matter to set, this is one of the two ways: either by the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is contracted due to inflammation.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is inflamed, you should wash it in this way: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth only, or dip it in hot water and squeeze out the excess, and anoint the intestine as much as it needs to be softened; and never do this without restraining, and it will become soaked and able to be unwound.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the flame depart, if the intestine is rough or sharp and raw, it is because it is inflamed, as this is the cause of the entry of little thing; and if it cannot enter, then a small wound is made with the instrument on the part that is cut, and the first cure is to cut off the size, which is not necessary but must be done in great necessity, and it is the stomach for the tearing: if it cuts deeply into the flesh and does not heal, and then it forms.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	When the wound has grown and the intestine jumps out, if it is reset according to its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, as this is the purpose.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you are able to make the patient lie on their stomach, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then make the head and shoulders higher than the lower abdomen, and thus the wound in the one of the two parts will be higher than the other; and it is necessary to manage this in large and dirty wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you are able to make the patient lie on their stomach, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then make the head and shoulders higher than the lower abdomen, and thus the wound in the one of the two parts will be higher than the other; and it is necessary to manage this in large and dirty wounds.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I pulled out the intestine and it had been 24 hours since it was inserted, and there was a wound of 15 years old, and I cared for it and it became healthy again.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the woman told me that it would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not use any remedies, because there was no medicine to be found, and I poured more on the wound twice a day, and the honey of the bee as much as it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and from the edge of the cloth, pull out the thread as far as the end; when it has been pulled out in straight lines, if the thread is too long or short, or if you have pulled it out on one side and not the other, then pull it out on the other side of the part that was cut; and the stitches will be equal if you do it as the tailor does with the threads, pulling one part and then the other until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, as Galen's method is called, if done correctly, brings together the two ends naturally and applies one end of the needle to the other, in this manner: thread an awl or a needle point near the edge, and make sure that the awl or needle point is close, and leave the two threads of the needle; then turn the awl, and make sure it pierces through the part closest to the density of the stitching, as the threads of the needle; then make sure it pierces through the other part of the stitching, using other needles that are on the other side; and this is the most common method of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	1. If the patient hears this speech and no one testifies, we must cut the belly at the eyes, or as many as there are; and it must be inserted on one side and the other, in the manner of those who are crucified; and when the rupture is near the belly, if it is more painful than the others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	1. The judgment of the wound is if it is as severe as the judgment of other wounds: and if you treat the fresh wound with all its blood, unless it has moved, then retract the intestine and the gut; then sprinkle powdered char on the wound, and if it has moved, then apply any ointment that is present, as long as the wound bows; then sew the thread, and be careful of the suture, and the mirror; then cure the wound as you would with others, until it is healthy; and if you have no medicines, then use them as much as they come out of the belly, a little fat, and mix it with water twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other skill in other cases than treating wounds; and if you doubt that the wound is not serious as to members, then it comes that you lightly oil the chalor or rose oil on the wound, and put on bandages and gauzes; and if there is pain or rash on the skin, and many times it comes, if the rash is cleaned with red wine, and also the rash comes to the intestine; and the percussion is made, and the guts are found, which are large, then it is lighter to cure than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The first line of the text translates to: "The intestine that is called 'young' cannot heal until it is opened, and this is due to the sensitivity of the wounds it has, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the horn jumps from the wound, and it is reset as the intestine is, while it is fresh; and if it becomes infected and turns black, then you must remove the black leu that has become infected, because it has veins and arteries; then cut through what is between the ligaments, and pull the head of the horn away from the wound until the extraction is done when the horn jumps, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, if it can be restored in several places, because I have seen that some were healed or the belly of a lance; and it was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and it became an ulcer and fistula, and therein was the egestion and vomiting; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not stop subtleizing until it was healthy, and I observed the signs.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when it was sutured, I doubted that the patient had not suffered in his belly; but he had no pain, but lay in better conditions, and drank and ate; and they told me that when there is a small wound in the intestine, one must stitch it in this way: first make large incisions, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the mouth has overturned, put it in between the lips, if it draws the mouth back; then close the teste, and it holds if it cannot slip, then make another movement in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	1. If the tip of the intestine is burned and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a very fine thread that is coated on the intestine of an animal, in a similar manner: take the tip of this thread of intestine that is free from moisture, and then tie it to the tip of this fil line of silk thread, and then pass the thread through the needle, and then sew the intestine, and then pull the thread tight; and this way of stitching is not better than according to the path of love and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, it should be tied with a very fine and delicate tie.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula", and likewise if they are hairy and have a thin covering.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the saying of the nodation that is hard and painful, or one does not feel pain, and is as hairy as the tail of an ox; and never clear-skinned, and sometimes thick, and never sparse, and never thin; and I have seen this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and has no pain, is only due to one of the eight causes: it is to know, by a little pain or corrosive, or because of its malice, or because it has too much bowel, or because it is porous and the matter is of poor quality, or because the medicine is not good in the cure, or because the corruption is like pestilence, or because of the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow health, and runs naturally; or one has wounds or bones: and I have shown all these causes and their signs and remedies with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The text translates to: "It is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistulas, which is made by human hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	The text translates to: "Fistulas are found in all parts of the body; for they come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, intestines, bladder, or any of the ribs, spine, or joints of the hands and feet; and if it comes to affect a particular part of the body, it causes similar symptoms.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	The text translates to: "Fistulas are found in all parts of the body; for they come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, intestines, bladder, or any of the ribs, spine, or joints of the hands and feet; and if it comes to affect a particular part of the body, it causes similar symptoms. All fistulas of this kind are painless and only cause labor and ignorance; and if there is no fistula that does not come from the place I have mentioned, and you are seeking the cure, and you see it, then take a needle or a piece of iron, if the fistula is straight, as you wish; and if the fistula is bent, then take a fine needle or a piece of iron, for the points will slip through the bending; and if the fistula is in the hands and you cannot find it by needles, then the clisterize by one of the pertus, for the moistors are more cort from one pertus to another, and make it clean; then you will know whether it is bone or nerve, and ask the patient if he feels any pain when you press with your hand, and the leu or he will tell you; and when you really know the leu or it is far from the jointure, or the nerf, or the artery or the vein, or any of the places I have mentioned, then follow the advice I have given you, and the faults and corrupted parts that are present; and then the cure, when it is healthy, and the fistula is well set in its place, if you follow it as much as you press, then take fine needles in medicine ague, and insert them at the end of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is excreted from the fons; and then take clean bandages in a healthy char, as it should be; and if it is not healthy, then the cauterize as we have said, and if the os is corrupted by the fistula, then the cope.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	1. If the limb does not cause pain or injury, and if it is a principal limb; and if the bone is discovered, and it becomes corrupted and blackened, then as long as the corruption remains, the treatment of strange things is done until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and the bowel is weak, then you must know that you are not alone in doing this: if it dislocates and you want it to be as soon as you are at the bone, and all the corruption is removed, then restore the joint; and if it becomes healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	2. If the corruption is too deep, and you cannot reach it; if there is no other means than sharp tools in nature; and if the bone is slightly corrupted, and you try to remove it with pliers, if the instrument is adjustable for this, and if there are many bones, do not leave any; and if moisture opposes you, and it does not cause error or pain, then cope and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you do not treat the wound at once, then put something on the wound that will draw out pus, and leave it until the pus reaches the bones, and then if the bones are lighter, then so much the better; if it is large bones such as those of the thigh or hip, then only allow the corruption to set in as long as there is no blackening, then restore the wound; and if a large part of the bone is corrupted and comes out of the socket, then cover it with something that will cover the corruption and then treat it as much as possible; and I will tell you about a fistula that came to my leg, so that you can use it as an example and help in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The text describes the case of a young man who had a pain in his leg for a certain number of years, which was caused by an issue with his chest. The matter came to his leg, and he suffered from a large abscess, but there was no reason to open it. However, the pus kept coming out, and it corroded the materials, turning into a fistula, and there came out of it blood from both ends and moisture from the chest. He was treated for two years, but he got no wisdom in the art of hands, as soon as I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to cure it, and what was corrupted by the blood from the chest. It became red in his chest, and had a citron color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at the end of all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I began to sew, and found a part of the bone in one of the holes as I discovered a piece of the bone that was rotten and decomposed, and it was the decay of the bone that was causing the pain; I thought that this was a part of the rotten bone, and I wanted to make sure there was no other decay, so I began to heal the wound with ointments for a long time, but I could not stop the pain; then I opened it again and found the decay continuing in the bone, and I treated it, and then I closed the wound; but I could only do so when I found a piece of bone at the end of all its parts, and the rest was decayed to every part, then I healed it with ointments; and it became healthy and healed quickly, and I did not want to resume the operation because of the inability of the surgeon to bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because of the evacuation of blood it often happens, but it was completely cured, and a hard char was found on the bone, and it was in good position and had no harm or contradiction at all, nor to the air nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the body, then it should be set in this way: take the linens, and stretch them at the head of the bone that is open, and command that it does not extend above; and take another large linen thread than the first, and tie it at the char which is out of the bone, and tie the head, so that you can draw the corrupted char away from the bone, and cut the char off where you see it set, that it may not break the char; and put a bandage or a table on the bone to cover the corrupted char; and set as many times as can be seen and felt, and set again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	1. And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in a large or small part, then cut through the skin all; then remove the affected part, and then separate the corrupt part from the healthy part, and the flesh that is longest from the corrupted part, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, and the joint is corrupted, and it contains another bone; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, and there is no other joint than the one that contains it; and if the corruption is on the hand or the foot, and it is very painful, but it does not matter what you do with it, as long as you investigate the corrosion, as it opens; and you cleanse it in all the ways you can, but the bone or the nerve does not oppose you; and you sharpen the knife and the tools for bones according to the seat of the bones and the appearance of the bones, and their greatness and their subtlety, and their growth and their decrease, and their hardness; and that is why you adapt your instrument to each appearance of the wound; and you ensure that your work shows the instrument you have, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; if you find the instrument that you have does not fit according to what it should.
dou feu	The first sentence in the provided text is
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The first sentence in the provided text is: "The head of the shoulder is dislocated.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes to the hand, if it is on the joint, and if the corrosion does not come to the arm; if it comes to the arm, if the corrosion is on the shoulder; if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and it is not worth being afraid of as much as the quantity of his valor; and then do whatever the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes in the first joint, if the corrosion is after the other joint; if it comes after the corrosion, if the corrosion is all over; if it goes up the leg, if the corrosion is on the knee joint; if it comes from the knee, if there is no other engagement than to make the patient die; and how the copper or silk of the member is, if it is that you link above and below, and extend some parts of one of the laces ahead, and some others behind the other lace, and you fasten the char that is between the two laces at the widest part of the spathe, as long as the bone is discovered; then the copper or silk, and put a loop of linen on each side, if it does not touch the healthy bone, and goes to the patient another wound and gangrene.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	When the skin is burned due to heat, and it is treated with any restraining powder, then return to your medicine as soon as it is prepared, and tie the wounded limb with a safe cord, and treat it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to my home in my short life: I found a black spot that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in my short life, and it burned all of it; and when the man saw the corrosion, if he could not cover the wound, and it became healthy; and later, after the wound was closed, I came to him, and I put some things that were repercussive after the circumcision, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I should cut his hand, and I did not want to have hope for the matter; and I also thought that if I cut my hand, it would not die, because the strength of the hand was weak; and he desperate, and returned to his land, and he covered his hand, and it became healthy; and I did not know what else could have happened because of this, if they had another way.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes with infection in the flesh wound, and it lasts as long as there is a great gathering of boils; then they pierce and tear, and with a leap they break the boils, and it appears to the eyes as if it were a fine web, and does not touch the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "gash", but if it is so long that it reaches the bone, it is called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the end of the bone, it is also called "fistula"; and the flesh is when you cut through all of it, and at the same time when it is fine, like some webs; and it does not rot because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the patient has a fiancé whose hair is falling out and the baldness is not yet visible, and the hair is dark in color, if the baldness worsens, treat the patient with Egyptian medicine that has been made: take oils, perfumes, and linseed, and place them in a pot over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take according to your need and make it into an infusion and a honey mixture, and apply it to the breasts and tighten the wound, and leave the medicine on for two hours, then draw it out by gently squeezing; repeat this process until the breasts are restored and the pain is gone, and no candles are used made of grapevine and ashes, but only honey and wine, which have the property of cleansing and washing; if the patient cannot bear the candling, or the Egyptian medicine does not heal the wound, or there is little ointment left, then apply a mixture of ointments and wine to the breasts and wound, or a mixture of various ointments and ointments that have been prepared; if the wound is too large, so that the leu or the candling can enter, and if the wound is discharging pus, then apply a mixture of Egyptian medicine or basilicon ointment to the wound.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the belly is in its proper place, do not let it be disjointed; and if you do not cover the wound with something as you see fit, but appear to be doing it in such a way that the belly is at the lowest part of the body where it is, since when the belly is in its proper place, do not let it be disjointed and if you do not cover the wound with something as you see fit, but appear to be doing it in such a way that the belly is at the lowest part of the body where it is, then take consolidating medicines to help put the patient back together, and put them on the side of the belly that covers all of the patient; then cover the wound with something as you see fit, but make sure it is not too tight in one place and too loose in another, according to the amount of the wound, and put it on the wound of the sick part to align the belly, and do not forget to adjust the great dressing later once; and the person who is by the wound of the sick part often feels the belly, whether it is venom or little or much, or digested or undigested, and take care if the patient feels pain or no pain, and if it has happened to him or not, and when your medicine has been extended and you see the nature that jumps out of the wound of the sick part, if you think that the breasts have already swelled, and approach the plague; then leave the morning or evening, and when you clean the wound, if you change the dressing and reapply the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is said that the breasts do not lactate.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venoms are subtle and short after a long journey, do not despair of your health, as your health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For if the wounds are not healed after a long journey and do not make progress, and if breasts become wet and painful after a long journey, do not despair of your health, as your health is approaching. If the ointment does not heal, and it is made with oil rose and vinegar in substance, then it is cooked and used; and the same makes honey grown, when the ointment is made, is not present, or you take milk and aloe and incense, and the broth, and the powder on the honey when it is near the fire; and then in glue and drapel, and it is attached to the breast, and never used by an aristologist for a long time, and the roots of lily of the valley, which is also like flour and centoire; and in use of simple or compounded: grind it, and make powder, and put on the honey I have said, and use; and if the cure is long, and not cured by this cure, then you know that the corruptions are in the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that develops from the tip of the finger or toe, or sometimes from other parts; when it becomes inflamed, and is not cared for, if the abscess opens, and bursts and oozes blood as far as the root of the finger, and in some cases even the entire root, and then comes the corrosions, which reach the bone, as soon as pain sets in, and the head is large, and the color is changed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that has been removed from the finger, then cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The cauterization is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the finger, and it starts to prick, and burn, then you must cut off the part of the nail that points at the finger, and pull it up, and apply some subtle and gentle medicines on the remaining part of the nail, then treat the wound as needed until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	2. And if the corrosion is in the bone, then it should be removed as soon as possible, because as much of the bone becomes corrupted and affected, so much less it can heal; and if you see the bone corroding, then cut it off at the point where it was said, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is hard, then cut it off, and it will feel great pain, then cut off the nail as soon as possible, and warded that the cut does not go through the finger which is of the nail, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if it happens, then put something that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the crushed hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The crushed hand of some men by chance is very painful, and by chance it may be broken in parts, and never united, and no one is born with the root of the joint, or the birth is not in any of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are crushed in no part are not silent, and those who are crushed at the joint are silent; the size of the one who is crushed is lighter, in the same way: size it in its root like a wide saddle.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are crushed in the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you have much pain.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the event that one wishes to reduce from the rear, if it is possible for you to first cover the hand around the bone firmly, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The signs that come are either born or caused by wounding, or caused by burning, or by other things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cover the wound, if it needs to be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two sheets or soft cloths moistened with oil rose, so that they do not stick together; or you can put between two pieces of fine linen as long as it is sore, if it comes.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If any of its two sides comes to the patient with the hand, if it is not hot, then it should be.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	There are large, bloated veins full of melancholic superfluities that come to more and more members of the corpse; and more come in the legs of those who go to prayer and work and bear.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must never administer any purge of colic, and then the proper of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is on the hot spots, and the other is to draw out the black blood; and the other way is when you tie the vein, and you draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	1. The size of the wound is such as follows: first, cut the leg of hot-blooded deer with a sharp knife until it is not subtle, then tighten the leg of the wounded animal by the thigh to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one or two or three places with a wide cut, then ease and draw out the black blood from your hand, as one by one from another, until all are drawn out as much as the wounded man can bear; then close it, and command that it be sewn with black meat threads; and continue the evacuation and cleansing of the wounds as the veins become plain, and nurse the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first sentence to translate: "The patient should massage the affected area with warm water, and then apply a hot poultice of herbs to the red, inflamed leg until it becomes less swollen; if there is no heat, then heat the poultice in the fire, and place it on the swollen part of the leg or in the ankle area; then wrap the leg with cloth, and scrape the poultice along the leg until it is completely dry, and you will see red and black marks on the leg, and if it seems like a rope, then cut the rind of the leg, and when it is dry, cut the cloth off the leg, and then place it on another piece of cloth, and scrape along the leg until it is completely dry, and then place it in another piece of cloth, and scrape along the leg until it is completely dry, and then place it on another piece of cloth, and scrape along the leg until it is completely dry; if you cannot lift or move the leg, then insert an iron needle into the fleshy part of the leg as deeply as possible, and then remove the needle, and then lift and place the leg in a cooler place, and then repeat the process until the leg is completely healed; if you cannot lift or move the leg, then insert an iron needle into the fleshy part of the leg as deeply as possible, and then remove the needle, and then lift and place the leg in a cooler place, and then repeat the process until the leg is completely healed; if you cannot lift or move the leg, then insert an iron needle into the fleshy part of the leg as deeply as possible, and then remove the needle, and then lift and place the leg in a cooler place, and then repeat the process until the leg is completely healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the viscus is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, but if you force it to be so, but do not cut it, then the truss as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	If the iron form is used to cut the viscus when it is twisted, and does not cut, but only compresses it, then it is a large cutting, because if it were too fine, it would compress the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the common vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the flesh that comes from the hide of the snake, as it comes from the belly of the snake and turns, it grows between the hide and the char.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	When the signs of the beginning of this vein are present if it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its color, and begins to bleed, as if it were a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is opened, if it is necessary to cover it with a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to two and a half inches wide, and the edge, and leave the cloth on the leg, and each time it is not closed, if the cloth covers the wound and the now, and if it is too long, if a part is cut off, and the remaining part is covered with the cloth, and does not cover its root, until it is all out; because if you cover it, it returns to the body, and brings forth pus and matter or leu, and severe illness; for this reason it is necessary that it be treated frequently and often, and nothing or no harm remains, and there is no time for this wound when it is treated with V hands of long, or X, and some hands came to me, where it was X hands of long, and when you cover it, if blood or pus comes out, and the wound is closed jusc’a fons, so that all is well; and let the matter that is dens be removed from the leu, and medicines are given without any food for jor, then the cure is like the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never once in this vein does the hand rain, and at the same time when it opens in the joint of the shoulder, or shoulder, and there comes out pus, and which falls; cure the patient as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of those that are born between leather and skin.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "disease of beef" because it often occurs with many wounds, and is a small worm that passes between leather and skin, and goes up and down the entire body, and is felt well at every joint of the limb, as soon as the hide comes off or it is cut, and jumps; and it is caused by the excrement of some humors, like worms, serpents, and squiggles, and ascaris; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes up and down the body, it reaches the head, and comes to the oil, by chance returns, and destroys the oil; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the patient healing and drawing in, if it can only be that when he will: if it comes to pass that you see the leg of him and from the opposite side well tightly, then cut off and take out, and put him in the cart, and do not worry, if the cauterization by fire is done as it dies; and the greatest harm it does, if it is that it goes into the oil, as we have said; and if you see him coming or going near the oil, if he is strained from it the hair forms, then cut off, and take out; and it is necessary to use the cauterant with mundification of liquid medicines for the humors of men, and avoid the flesh of enjambed animals as food.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from dislocation
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "wakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain members, and spreads from member to member; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a female patient, and I saw my arm, and saw a small flesh in the vein of her arm; and later, I saw it rise as quickly as anything, as if it were living silver when it cut through the other; the pain left that arm and moved to the shoulder, and then it spread throughout the body, so that it came to the other arm; then she told me that she dislocated her shoulder, just like you see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was surprised to see how it moved from limb to limb, as I have never wanted this disease to occur in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I wanted to ensure that the pain was not transferred from one limb to another, but I did not want this. I thought it was because the woman had tight muscles, and the veins were exposed, and because of this, the constraint appeared; but I did not know if this was true for those who are delicate, and have moist veins and recovered bones.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the curing of this disease, and the patient feels pain, does it open as we have said, if the limbs are tightly bound and untied, and then press on it as long as the constraint remains at the joint; and cauterize the joint; and if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of those who have this constraint is like pills bitter and pills of rue, and similar ones.
des saiettes	The first sentence is "des saiettes".
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The second sentence is "Les saiettes sont diverses, selon leur semblance et selon les leurs dou cors ou elles chient." which translates to "Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the strength of the nerves or they shoot.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The third sentence is "Li diversitez de lor est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres." which translates to "The diversity of them is that they have those with large points, and small, and hooks, and soles; and those with angles, and those with tails, and those without pieces; and one that dislocates in any member in different ways: or in the principle member, it chevies like the brain, the liver, the spleen, the lungs, the heart, the stomach, the bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. If you see that you are going to have to extract this arrow, because death will follow in other places; and if the wound does not appear to be deep, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then remove it, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of a broken bone is when the arrow pierces the bone and causes the eye to jump, and the person who is near the eye falls to the ground, and they have loss of sight, and confusion and despair and trembling and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of cold; and by chance it is without nose or ears; and by chance affects the speech and voice; and a sudden jump of the wound, white like snot, resembling a gout; and if you see this sign, if you hold on to the care, and remove the arrow if it is not deep.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it pains or throbs is that it hurts or aches near the medial side, and it feels as if it is cracking in something hard, without emptying; and by chance, the shoulder also becomes stiff, and in the cold, there is cold sweat, and sinks: then the signs of death begin to appear.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the eye that has not opened is that there are no signs of swelling from the wound, and the throat is bloated, and the face turns pale, and gasps for breath high up in the chest, and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	When the shoulder is dislocated and the chest is covered, if it is tightened on the small ribs; and there is great pain and suffering and gasping; and all the members of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the dislocated shoulder or stomach, by chance, jumps from the wound, nothing indigestible of the meat is left.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the dislocated shoulder or abdomen, and in a sudden jump through the small intestine, if there is no hope in the treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the dislocated shoulder or bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out in a sudden flow, and the patient feels great pain: signs that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and neck and shoulder and arm and elbow and spine of the back and fingers and toes, and the member seeming, are saved according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the flesh or artery, and it is not visible, as I will tell you if I know, because you are doing this.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me once a shaft hit me in the shoulder: I tried it, and from another part of the grease of the ear, it was saved without any difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And there came to him a arrow that he fell into the fat of the oil of oils and the paper of oils, and the arrow was reponed, and it could not reach but only to the tip of the point, and it was the arrow great like a Turkish arch, with no weight on his ears; the wound was safe and he did not come near any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there came to him an arrow through the neck of a Saracen, and it was the Arabian arrow with ears: I was the beards, and subtle as much as I passed, and it was safe for the Saracens.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And a arrow was found in the man's side, which he thought was mortal; and then after 30 days, if it did not change its position, I cut near the arrow, sewn it up, and the dislocation followed, and there was no further complication.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if a man has an arrow in his side or back, and it causes a wound to bleed; and the arrow remains in the wound, and does not change its natural position, and does not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if another man has an arrow in his face, and it causes a wound to bleed; and he does not suffer great pain; and other things of the same kind.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	A member of the royal household had a dislocation in the shoulder, which was previously stable but became unstable over time. It was then realigned three years later.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is widely stretched.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I gently examined the wound and could not feel anything; it felt prickly and painful on the right side of my ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow, so I applied the ointment made from the rotten flesh of the beast to the wound, because the wound did not swell; but it seemed to me that it was the arrow itself.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I place the healing hand on it, and treat the right wound, and stay there with the patient's long arm, until he feels the arrowhead come out of his shoulder; and he tells me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied the medicinal poultice to the wound, as it was deeply infected, and pressed on the head of the arrowhead stuck in the shoulder; then I covered the wound with the medicinal poultice, as the patient's shoulder became visible; and it healed well within four months, and then I removed the thorns and the nails I had inserted, and could not; therefore, I continued to refine and invent ways to destroy, as soon as I took out the thorns with well-made nails, according to the form that comes at the end of this chapter, as I mend the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	The patient's shoulder is judged to be unable to restore the cartilage of the nose: I will restore it therefore, and it was relieved by the wound, and it became healthy for the patient entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have said the quality of extracting some arrows, if you apply your care according to what I will not say, for the books cannot make everything appear completely pure; but the masters of the art can manage well with a few good things and what is present and lacking, they perform nine operations and use nine instruments, as things that are extracted by this art descend.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are not broken because of two ways: either by the hand or they enter, or in another way; and the one that is thrown through or it enters, is an arrow that has entered into the flesh, and it has never been thrown once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, if she leaves it as is, and it becomes inflamed and the issue comes out; and then she gets stuck in the bone, and she cannot come out if she leaves any parts empty, and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, if she perceives subtly at all times, as long as the issue is made sharp, and then it comes out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrowhead gets stuck in the bone of the shoulder, and it goes towards one of the chest cavities, or any of the accidents I have mentioned to the assistant: if she does not remove it, but leaves it as is until it becomes swollen after some time, because if she removes it, it will cause death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	When the joint is not dislocated only in the bone and does not cause any problem, and there are no other accidents, then the patient can move freely without pain.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the joint becomes dislocated and cannot be reduced, then apply firm pressure on the affected area as I have mentioned earlier; then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the joint is not visible and cannot be felt, then try to locate it using any available means; if you feel it, if there is no instrument to use, and if you do not want to cause further pain or injury to the wound, then gently pull on the arrow until the wound is as large as possible; then remove the arrow from the joint, and if there are ears in the joint, then break or crush them as much as possible before removing them; be careful not to break the joint.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not once, if the leaf until it is read, then the hair, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the healing does not correspond to the wound, then the cure in this chapter is wrong; and you will be cut on the nerve and vein, and made to hold the incision with your hand, and treat the arrow as if it were the most serious injury that you have had, and if you do not, then follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or it opens no thing of him, or the skin is tight in some place where one can see or feel it: then cut it as much as the nails can take, and then pull it out: if it hurts now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if your hand turns around as it enters the bone, and widens the bone, then it will be withdrawn.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, if left alone, and then the extraction resumes as it is drawn; and if it is a sponge and has been drawn out, it should be cut off at all points; and if it is a thorn, and you see it being administered, if the point of the thorn enters the hair of the instrument; then it should be pulled out, and if the sponge is hair, it should be pulled out by the point entering it, to lighten the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrowhead is deeply inserted, then you should cut through the entire shoulder or the poison sac, and then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrowhead is pointing towards the belly, abdomen, or chest, and it has entered, and you pull it out, and it comes out easily; then pull out the vein and the nerve, and then extract the arrowhead, and then clean the wound as much as possible; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the points used to extract arrows is similar to the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are three types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the shaft.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed hair is like that of a squirrel's tail, when inserted at the end of the shaft, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the tacks to insert and to remove, if it is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are common veins, of which the healthy ones are thirty-one, of which sixteen are the two "herbage" arteries that follow the ears, called the "aspires"; and the vein that is in the temples; and the veins that are in the front of the head, called the "aspires"; and the vein that is at the top of the head; and the veins that are in the chin; and the veins that are in the corners of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the veins that are at the bottom of the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	1. The veins that are commonly found in each arm are usually five: one is the cranial, which is on the western side of the chest, and it is called the "grief vein"; and the other is called the "fast" and is composed of the cranial and the basilic, and they call it the "grief of the shoulder"; and the basilic is when it is on the eastern side of the chest, and they call it the "grief of the belly", and it is under the femoral, and it is the one that is usually found, which opens clearly under the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	2. The salvage is the vein that is between the auricular and the anal, if it rains; and in the leg and on the thigh are three veins: one is the "grief" of the pocket of the western side of the chest, and the second is the "grief" of the ankle of the eastern side of the chest; and the vein that is called "nise", which is in the ankle of the other thigh; and in the other leg there are three veins of the same kind.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	1. The ears that follow the eyes if aided by old catharses and migrations; and the quality of this saver, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the malady of the patient, and rub the ear or the ears that are of a rough cloth; then stretch the patient's neck to a vine, until the ears appear behind the eyes in the dependent dependence of the head: if you want to do this for your child, and you feel the pain in your child's head, then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just above the bone, then gently hold all the vein with both hands, and cover and the skin and the vein well until it is completely healed, and make sure the sutures are as you see; then tie and lie down, until it is healthy; and I have already said the incision and the cauterization of the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	1. The health of the two arteries in the temples, if they are old, hardened, and customary, and if they are affected by the tears of the eyes; and if the physician qualifies them as I say: and it is that the physician draws his collar as much as the eyes open widely; and it feels like the touch of cold water on your skin, and then it becomes sensitive; then he should gently press on the cheek above your index finger, and remove the lancet, and gently lift the cheek above, and the eye, as you have done in the other cheeks, and make a cut according to your necessity; then release the physician, and put your hand on the cheek for an hour, then put cotton; and then form the wound, and leave it as long as it is healthy; and we have spoken and of their extraction and their removal, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient with the vein of the front of the head is as sick as the crown of the head with ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and bruising; and you should examine it if the patient tightens his neck by twisting it as much as the vein appears; then take the instrument called the "fissure", which is shaped like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and firmly with your hand or another thing, and let the blood come out according to the amount you see; then loosen the collar for the patient as much as possible, and hold the vein so that it is safe and never twist it with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	All that is needed to heal the wound is for the flame not to be too hot; and through it, because the bone is near, and by chance, the fire breaks the skin when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The healing of the two wounds that are in the two arms if they help the bones, and the elbow, and the bruise, and the face in the oil, and the diseases of the face; and the quality of their healing if it is that the maltreated pulls his neck with twisting any ligament, as before; then the healing, and so the healing of a long wound, a little wide and a little large flame, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance very sharp; then make a large incision as much as you can, and then lift the skin, and hold it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	If the wound of the vein is not deep and does not seem to be infected, or if it is a skin disease, and rash comes into the skin, and especially when it is old; and if the quality of the wound is that the flesh clings to the collar, then hold the wound in your left hand and take the subtle flame short, and touch the eyeball with the flame between the two eyes, because the vein does not open well, and now it will start to burn; and do not let it burn too much, and make a large incision as you need to, then close it at night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	1. The patient's health is aided in the prevention of diseases, at the beginning of medicine, and in many afflictions, and infections, and corrosions, and herpes, and ulcers; and the quality of the patient's health is estimated if the midwife tightly holds the neck of the child on both sides, as we have said; and the midwife being at the loins of the midwife, and the midwife sitting at the siege, then the vein is made long, and wide, and then the blood is let out in large amounts, or as much as possible; then another part is done on the other vein, then the limbs are loosened, and the veins are straightened, so that the midwife does not tighten; and it is left until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the hares
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the hares is aided by the veins of their lips if they help to close in the mouth, and the corruption of the genitals, and gums of the lips, and teeth and jaws.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is if it is made to sit before you, and holds its neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, of which one is on the left side and the other on the right, and they are black due to their dark color and because they have thin dark veins: therefore, do both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then take the largest one from each part, and do all the veins that are open and closed, as it is a different method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health of the tongue, the language
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are dislocated from the tongue if helped after the health of the head, and it is at the gorge's extreme, and diseases of the throat, and diseases of the mouth; and you judge the quality as soon as the patient's hands are before the sun, and loosens the tongue, and looks at each side of a black vein: healthy on one and the other, and do not alarm too much, for they are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly healthy are in two ways: either by pricking at all the flame with wide fingers, or olive oil subtle as you cut, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and extremity of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is such that it is called the "mouth" when it is newly made, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is made to open the veins with flat hairy stones that contain large blood clots and are troubled; and this is the form of the fire cautery:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle to apply, and it is safer for the veins, or if there is subtle blood clots.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The benefit of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is that it helps with diseases that are low in the throat, and neck, and belly, and artery, which is also low. And it is necessary for the physician to make wise decisions and avoid the artery that is low.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If the artery is pricked and blood comes out, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and it should not be pricked with fire, but cut with a knife as I have said.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basin does not open obviously, if it is necessary to force it, and change another one; or you do not want any rain on it, or you are in the vein of the arm: it opens obviously; and the fire is extinguished with a knife, as I have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the vein of the wound, if it is necessary to force the arm, and touch the vein as much as you can see the pulse; then sign the vein with a knife, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with fire anesil; and watch that you do not hurt the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If you see coming out from the top like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, you should know that it is not from the artery: hurry to you, and put your hand far away, then watch your hand as it comes out without staining, many times; hold your arm, let it go, and do not move the muscles; and so be careful, and do not move it until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	2. If it is not stained and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then if the artery is open, because the end of the return; it will become stained.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	1. Take a scalpel, sharpen it, and then take one of the halves and tie it well to the other; if it is not slippery, it is good; if not, then use the poultices that make it non-slip; the poultices are not greasy in other positions for the small wound of the wound, and the pain of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	1. The health of the vein is improved if it is treated with blood when it is infected, and when it is inflamed, because it is composed of basilican and cephalic, as we have said; and it should be washed with the nerve that is inflamed, and if it does not become too much in a short time, and it opens the nerve, and it becomes fat and healthy, and by chance it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it should be cleaned with the instrument we have; and remove the nerve from your body.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If blood flows between the two veins, if they are long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The salve for the head if it helps, that it attracts blood from the chief and helps the wounds; and it is safer when pricked with olive oil or myrrh, because it is the most safe of all wounds, because it does not harm the nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	All in all, it is best to use it lighter the first time, and do not hurt anyone, and then continue; and by chance, it may cause some discomfort in some people, but it does not hurt anyone the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about health is that it is to maintain health and avoid diseases coming; and it should be made in one of the three veins: it is to know, the head, fast, and basilic; and it must be done at the beginning of the patient's arrival, and again during the night or the next day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is amiss with diseases has no determined age, but when it comes to eating or drinking, in all hours and at all times; and it does not matter if it's for children up to 14 years old, or women who are only carrying for four months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They should not neglect their health at all, even if they have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when one becomes healthier, in whatever way that may be, if it causes the intestines of a light cyst to expand, if it has no need for feces retained, and if the wombs do not have superfluous harmful intestines, nor too much meat or yeast, even if it is caused by colic, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and multiplied by women's menstruation and labor, and sleep, and breakfast, and whatever virtue, or by the arm or a bruised corse; then subtly the humors are reduced, if it is not too large, by meat and drink and medicines, as you can afford; then take a bath, nothing harms you, to reduce your sickness, and to cleanse the veins before the third, as we have said; and keep away from work, and pleasure, and luxury, and such things; and be modest and humble, and so be healthier than those who are sick, and rub your hands twice or three times, then draw out the nails if they are too tight or small, as you cannot remove them without; then rub the hands with ointment, then put your right hand on the swollen vein a little oil, then take your left hand and put it on the swollen vein as much as it needs to be squeezed, so that the vein does not bleed or hurt.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like cords to the healthier part, and if they are too many, then when one is placed on the fire, it withdraws from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of those; and if the vein is opened, then it is the wound too tight, for then it comes to the healthier part, and the healthier part must be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, then it returns a little more of that joint or suddenly, and if it is not enlarged, it is not good.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	1. If the patient is small and the joint is swollen, and the shoulder does not move much, and there are no abscesses on the arm: by chance, apostemes come; do not enter or bathe, then resume the treatment as it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the subcutaneous tissue is not cut too much, and you doubt that there is not so much blood as you have seen, because of this in the same wound at all times; and the work is done quickly, otherwise if the shoulder is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	2. If the shoulder is swollen and you do not resume the treatment, and put a little oil on it, because it lightens the corse of the pain, and makes it less bitter in this shoulder that the oil lies; and afterwards, give oil to the shoulder that you have oiled the wounds, to strengthen the course of the pain; and it itself makes triaicle and bowe d'eus, when you put it on the shoulder; if subtly it does not cut or part when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	When large abscesses appear, which often come multiple times, if it is not healthy only once when the vein opening is small, if you hurry, and put a damp sponge on the wound and wrap it in a cloth, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no black or greenish discharge at the wound after several days, if you do not know why; and if you see, put nothing on the wound except aloe or mint cream, or a similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is gangrene and appearance of the health of the basilica: then place your hand on it, and if you feel the shoulder move with the compression of your hand, that is the appearance of malformation.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	However, you must not place anything on it that we have said, for by chance in the cut without the artery; but I applied it dry to strengthen the shoulder, then another care, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each sac according to its quantity of virtue and color of the sac.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black when it comes out, leave it until it is red; and if you see it large, leave it until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, leave it cooler.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	1. It is necessary for those who are in pain and fear, and have the skill of extracting blood, to make a larger incision, and widen the wound; and for those who are weak, the opposite is done, and it is made safer and more often, and it should be made safer by cutting across, not touching; and this way of healing is saved from the dislocation of blood and nerve compression, and it is worth noting that the longer incision is not wider.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	1. And for the one whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give a moistened piece of pomegranate juice; if it is cold, three times or four times as much blood; and if it is of a cold complexion, before the moistened piece of pomegranate juice, either in honey or aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-odored honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If the patient feels ill after the evacuation of blood, if he sweats and has a putrid odor, and uses other things as we have mentioned in the division or chapter of sincope for the evacuation of wind.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If the patient sees his arm swell and become sicker again, if it happens when he is weakened by great sickness, so that he becomes sick little by little, according to the amount of his virtue continually.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If the patient sees his arm swell after the first illness and is strong, if he becomes sick seven hours after the first illness, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if it seems healthier from another point of view, then it should be healthier to do it the next day or the following one.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has to have blood from the body that has been scratched, and brings on fever; if it comes out in large quantities, and opens the wound as much as it can; then that you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the wound every time it gets healthier, so that the death does not come from pus, and this happens many times when the healthy ones are negligent; and it will be enough to see that your arm sweats, and let the sang run the second time, and the wound is closed, so that you press on it; but if it is swollen, then stretch your arm as quickly as possible, because it would be harmful; but leave it as long as it gets healthier the second time; or if you do not touch the tip of the flame, until the part that has been scratched freezes in the vein and is put back into the fire, and gently press on it with your little finger.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not hold it tight, as long as the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to draw blood again, then if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in another hand.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is composed of the same material as the vein from which the blood was drawn.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of the healthy one is that if the patient's hand becomes red and hot when blood is drawn, then it is tied tightly until the vein appears well, then the blood is now passed through the vein, not too wide or too long; and the wounds are large and well placed near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be stopped, then the hand is made hot again and the sang is left in the vein as much as possible; and if this is the case, then do not tie the hand in hot water, because it is put in more than necessary; and the vein from this one is safer than all others, because it has not been pricked or cut.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	1. If the salve of the right hand saves from all diseases of the belly, then this is the way: wash the hand, and dry it with hot water, as long as the vein is open, if you can; and if the hand is clean throughout, and does not cause any harm; and do not let it remain too long, for the skin is dry and prone to cracking, and then put the hand back in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	2. And when you have treated as much blood as is suitable for your task, if you put on the vein oil and seal it tightly, and then make a small hole in each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient's hand if it is affected by the disease of the mouse, and I do everything as I have said to the left.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the sophene if it is beneficial to all diseases that are caused by the heart, such as heart diseases, and retention of flowers, and gallbladder disease, and knee and hip diseases, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health if it is that the patient has fever and sweating as long as the vein is cold, and pressing on the joint of the puncture; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and by pressing the puncture wound to the knee; thus, the rain is healthy, or larger than the ankle, or at the knee, which is needed.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cleanse the wound with your clean hands, if there are nerves that are exposed, and the wound is long, as in cutting; and let the sutures be tight.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the wound does not come out, then set the wound in a sling and let the wound dry well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wound becomes infected again, the second time it is due to a small amount of fluid; do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and then make a poultice of the other wound properly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The inflammation of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the foot, and its cure is the pain of the heel, when it is due to a sac.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	1. And the quality of its health if it is that the patient has caught or bathed, and draws on the ankle IV times in twisting, because otherwise it will not open the vein; and if it opens, then the healthy in all ways you can, and across; and it is worth coping, for the lesion is safe and it is returned to the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	1. And if you do not coping, then the healthy no one who has opened or down from the joint that has opened or side little two, and turn the small door; and make as much blood as you see, and then let go of the link, and put on cotton and draw; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	Of childbirth pains
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horn, or iron, or wood; and ventouses can be done in two ways: either by cutting and pulling out the blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventouse, which is made by cutting, can be done in two ways: either it is all fire, or it is fire; and ventouse which is made by cutting and blood extraction is made in twelve degrees of the heart, of which some are at the top, and the others in the chest; and the others in the collarbone; and the others in the shoulder blades; and the ventouse of the chin; and the ventouse of the elbows; and the ventouse of the knees; and the ventouse of the ankles; and the ventouse of the toes; and this ventouse does not take any blood, only small wounds that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not cause much pain, as we do with childbirth pains; and it only needs to be kept clean, neither hot nor cold, in no disease that comes from repletion, as long as the heart is dry.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessary for illness, or by habit, if the midwife comes every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and also in the middle; for there are some who, when they have to ventilate, weigh a lot; and if such as have accumulation and bruising in their face, and in their chin, and at the collar, and are pale; and those who have a fever in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit out blood; and if it is some who cough, and see only blood, and feel pain; then there are some who have such that they sweat, and their heart beats fast, and they die.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it has been one month, we command our patient to rest after three hours a day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The health of the head helps to alleviate pain in the child... that comes with these wounds, and it is only after all the blood has been evacuated; and this rest is beneficial for the health of the pediatric patient, and only those who have a cold complexion or are sick should use it, as it can cause great harm; and therefore, only the watchman in use, or those who have cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal, if they become dependent, and for this it is necessary to put the ventouse in a smaller place due to fear of dependence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventouse in the neck is in the lower part of the shoulder and the throat, and for this it is necessary to use it in emergencies, and to remove the bowel from the abdomen, and for all, and to relieve; and it should be tightened, as it holds too firmly, causing dependence or stomach and intestines.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventouse in the neck is around the collarbone, and it causes pain in the shoulder, and obtains and migraines, and causes strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in the lower part of the throat; and it is necessary that you command the patient to express his hand when putting it on, that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause dependence.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The first line of the text translates to: "If the wind causes the cheek to swell, it is a sign of disease in the mouth, and corruption in the genitals, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is also a sign of sickness in the upper lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The second line of the text translates to: "If the swelling of the shoulder indicates disease that comes from chills and filling, it is a sign of illness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The third line of the text translates to: "If the swelling of the cheek is as great as three swellings in the arm, it attracts blood from these large swellings; and instruct the patient not to press too hard, because the swelling is naked and knows how to decrease and narrow arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The first line of the text translates to: "The vacuum that is used at the crown if it is too large can cause headaches and other diseases, and it must be large enough to have a good hold; otherwise, it may break; and it causes great pain.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The second line of the text translates to: "The vacuums for the legs are healthy when they open widely, as they attract blood from all parts of the body, and relieve old pains from the knees, thighs, and bladder, and stimulate the growth of hair; and they are in the use of the second phalanges and second metacarpals, and they weaken the body after long use, and cause palpitation in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	1. The manner to apply the cautery is if you first empty it, and then do so successfully, and move it evenly, and continue doing this until you see the red and swollen part, and the appearance of painful blood; then stop, and put back the cauteries, and take care in the positioning of the cors, as there are those who have such tightness and loose parts: if you only want to injure once, and make large wounds, and a few punctures; and lightly apply it.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	2. And if it is not big enough, then if you only injure once: the first time by making the vein's passage slightly larger.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the head is not treated immediately, it can be seriously injured; and when we only need to draw a little blood, we only need to do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we need to draw a lot of blood, we often return; and if the head is not treated immediately, it can be seriously injured; and if the pain is not noticed, and it ends when the ears are perceived slightly, and for those with thick skin and hard bones, and who have rough hair, you should apply ointments of cooking oil: if this is the case, use olive oil, or sweet almond oil, or sesame seed oil; and if it is silver, use garden cress oil, or lemon oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	When the swelling is large and cold, if you take oil of almonds, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	When the skin is thin and large pores, it is not recommended to apply oil, but it is recommended to wash after the application of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or onion vinegar, or porcelain vinegar, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And that which has moisture, if it rises from sweat, or rose water, and mint, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluities rise from wine vile, or from ague of sweat, or from decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar things; and they do not become healthier by ventilating before bathing, but after the bath, an hour or two; and they do not sleep after ventilating, and they must wake up when it is time to ventilate and when it is ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And when those who are healthy become weak and too hot, and they sweat excessively and burn, if they consume cold things like pomes grenates and endives and laitues in the salad, and similar things; and they drink pucins, and char of chastron, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	Here comes the translation:
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	1. The incisions that are made to cause pain are those that are made on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and bowels and intestines and bladder, for this member does not suffer from sharp pain unless it is drawn out by drawing blood from member to member, as we do with the breasts when they are not sick; to relieve the viscosity that is in the member, as we do with the stomach and bowels to alleviate the member; and to relieve the pain when it is inflamed or pierced, if it is relieved by its own virtue attracting inflammation, or if it is left without inflammation; and then it is made when it is placed on the liver and spleen when it has retained inflammation, and these incisions are administered empty to suck only; and never are they administered together with fire, and never are they made with cold tea, as in some diseases of the plague, and in this way we fill the incision with hot water, or with water that has been cooked herbs, as it is.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows: It consists of two strips of palm half an inch wide and a small perforation at the end of each strip, similar to a needle, and a loop of wire or iron to be inserted before to prevent it from piercing the patient's member; and in the middle, a hole of wire or iron to receive a thong, and according to the disease and weight of those who take them, whether they are thin or fat. For the vacuums of children are different from those of adults, and smaller than those of the obese.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	1. And it must be placed on the dressing on the member: take the candle or the liniment, and insert it into the wound through the hole that is in the wound, so that the linament is at the bottom of the wound and does not burn the patient; then place it on the member, and you must place it on the abscess as we have said, if you see, if there is vapor coming out, and if you open the wound; and take the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you can.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	1. In the wound, however, that is infected with the disease of catarrh, without any hole or abscess, and is not infected unless it is clear of fever, and is only placed on the member when it is clear of fever, and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	1. Withouts are not made except in parts where there is no way to put on stockings due to their small size, such as the lips and genitals, and similar parts; and in these parts, if they are without stockings like a char's, or if they are not, and other similar cases; and the quality of the user is that when you find withouts that are in soft waters, such as they are, take them and put them in a soft water bath, as long as they are suitable for the family and have nothing in the belly; then it is healthy for the vein and the wound, then clean the member as much as it is red, and put on the stockings; and when they are flat and smooth, if it is possible to put on the wound, put it on, because this is after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift the leg of the wound, and then the edge; and if you see it too late after the corset of the gauze is removed, then take a piece of linen cold water, and put it on, as long as the gauze is not soaked; and if the gauze is multiplied, then put on vitrol or gashes, and similar things, as long as it is soaked; or you can make half of your legs with cut-off nails, and leave them as they are on the leg, if it is now stitched; and if you have more time, then take others gauze.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the wounds do not take on the salve, if you rub the lesion with warm ointment or thread it as much as it needs, and then put it on, and as they feel the soreness, if they become red; and when you see that they start to heal, if you dust a little aloe and silk or charcoal, or dust, now they will.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of the book on wounds.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of wounds and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	I advise you, young man, that if you do not follow this chapter, you will never see any of the ancient books, nor write anything; and for this reason, the science is neglected in our land, because I have never found a book on the subject; and I do not know if there is any, except by the science of the ancient books, or by my studying them and treating the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the dislocations that are done, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the sum of words and chapters or sentences where the meaning can be understood, and more so if those who have experienced it learn this noble art, and learn to teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that if any injury, dislocation, or twisting, or tightening comes to no part of the patient's body, if nothing harms him on either side, whether it be from the weakness of his limbs, or from the weakness of his bones; or if he is not very thin, or too fat; and if he drinks not cold water, nor drinks any fatty drinks, nor eats very little, nor eats too much, and does not fill his veins with blood, until he has no doubt of gangrene or expansion of matter in the member; if he returns to his former state of health as soon as he can.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient's meat that causes large swelling, or if it has viscosity, like wheat cooked in vinegar, and tests, and peas, and pancakes made of wool, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the swelling that is regained, it returns less quickly than the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that the broken bones and cracks cannot be well recovered or strengthened according to their nature by the care of the members, nor those that are too flexible, like those of small children; but if it is necessary, reset the broken bone with large tendons that are united with the member as it was before, and do not leave it without its work, and for this reason it is necessary to avoid large amounts of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And observe that fractures come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the leg or foot, and I will explain all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go in one direction and others in another, like the size of a pen's tip.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a small notch.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each fracture has its own way and instrument for restoration, according to what remembrance comes to the patient's mind; and the fracture of the bone is due to it being twisted, and open well by depression, and some pressure on the hand; and if it is not tortuosity or fissure, but there is no fracture, then there is no tortuosity or fissure; but there may be twisting or fissure or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it with your hand alone, but use the medicines that will come later, and then attempt to pull it subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Examine the fracture that will occur in the bone, and the two parts that are disjointed. It is now necessary to align them as evenly as possible, without causing any pain or swelling; if the swelling subsides and comes out, then leave it alone until the swelling has subsided. Then move it gently and carefully, and consider whether the restoration of the bone is lighter than the restorations made on other bones with pieces missing. Then attempt to pull it now.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone of the foot, if it is broken into two parts, if it is hands or fingers, or a part of your hand is small members, or two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are adjusted, if you adjust by your own hands the additions in their place on the muscle that you push, and keep that by your effort does not cause the surgical wound or pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels good to the hand if it seems that it is not well: if it curves beautifully, and does not strain too much, do not press as they do who come by their own effort, ache and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the limb is at rest, if the patient carefully keeps it still, neither by day nor by night, nor when turning, nor in any other way, then the limb will be well secured so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For if he feels no pain, unless it is at rest, then it is necessary to put the limb in proper position so that it does not feel any pain; and keep it straight, so that twisting does not occur when it is repositioned; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I will tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It is said that broken bones are of different kinds in small and large size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For it has large limbs, if like branches and leaves: if they are covered with fine linen and subtle threads; and those that are thick, if like timbers and beams: if they are covered with a wide and hard cord, for the wide ones embrace all the great member, and draw it evenly by all parts, unless there is no tail; then the end of the threads is light and three or four times the size of the member, and the hand is tightly held around all the thread, then go to the break and draw it less than the break, so that the break does not extend much part of the healthy part, then take another thread and turn the end right against the broken part; then return to the part opposite the break, and draw it gently, neither too much nor too little, as we have said in the first part of the break; then put between the threads covered with linen or silk, as it is even, then tie everything with a bend, and then put your good nails on, if there is no gape or burst.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If it is inflamed or gangrenous, if one puts on something soothing for gangrene, and that stops the inflammation, and leaves no traces; then one must tightly hold one's breath, and they should be of about a wide rope's length without sagging, or of fist-sized pieces of wood, or of palm fiber, and they should be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	However, it is necessary that the piece put on the wound be larger and wider than the others; and should also be as long as the member is small or large; then tightly hold the eyes as you did in the first part, then tie a thread around it as you did in the first part, until it is as tight as possible, and do not stretch it too much; and the thread must be clean, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of linen; for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen the works of fools who make their wrists with linen threads, it is a great mistake, for the wound cannot be held tightly if it is too fine, and it only serves to make each eye smaller than necessary.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is guided by the shoulder bones after the scar is removed in healthy people, if they put on thin linen or silk, if it does not crack.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splint, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment for this after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is said that it is difficult to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not possible to straighten them immediately after the fracture; rather, it takes several days or weeks, depending on the severity of the injury; and this is how the ancient methods of restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists were done: take flour that is between the millstones, mix it with a lot of water, and make a dough with it, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore breaks in various positions, as well as for women and children, because it is neither too hard nor too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	1. Another way to mend fractures and dislocations and twists: take barley and linen and unguent and Arabian gum and mugatel, in the ratio of X to V; then grind and add aloe, in the ratio of VIIII to V; and make a powder, and mix it with the dough of urine; if the complexion of the face is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	1. Another way to mend twists: take Arabian gum and vismud, in the ratio of X to V; grind and add aloe, in the ratio of VIIII to VI; cinnamon, in the amount of X; arsenic, in the amount of X; then dry well, and cook with water or urine, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to mark joints and bones is to use oils and liniments that soothe the pain and reduce inflammation. To make these remedies, mix fresh mint with cooked oil and honey, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore health, but they are useful for soothing inflammation and relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another remedy for healing broken bones is to make a poultice using dried figs and earth oven bread, and apply it to the affected area.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another remedy for healing bone fractures and reducing inflammation is to make a poultice using dried figs and earth oven bread, and apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	The root of vismallow, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of violets, and each part; and boil, and conserve with wine, and wash the limbs with moistened coriander or lavender water, or plain water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to apply the ointment more frequently than the first, when the abscess is firm and comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Boil the roots of vismallow, and linseed meal, bay leaves, honey, and all the flowers of violets and chamomile, each part; and boil, and preserve with salted or sweet water, or wine, according to the chalor of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not put anything on the broken bone to restore its strength, as only wax and oil are needed, and nothing more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It appears that Galen suggests putting on the broken bone to restore its strength, with dry things like honey, aloes, and incense, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to relieve pain and injury: take mugath and chevon's hooves, or oyster pins, and vismalve, and seil, and the bones, and make a plaster and apply it to the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the pain gradually subsides, and one takes care that the patient does not feel any pain in their joints or bones; if it does not subside by hand pressure, and pain or itching comes to the joint, and you hasten to remove it, and cleanse the wound with salted water, and plunge in cold water, and lift the leg as much as the itching ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and wrap in a bandage as long as you are sure of no gangrene, and allow the inflammation in the member to subside, and the pain to cease, then resume the gentle pressure, and a little emplaustre, and do not strain it too much; and gradually as it becomes healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the wound is gushing blood, bleeding, and painful, and the swelling is increasing, then you have skill in plastering and bandaging, if it recurs, as you have done initially well.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if you do not see any sign of what we have said, if it does not bleed for more than three or four or seven days; and never more than twenty days, as long as the wound is suppurating and approaches the limb to the char sus; then the restraint should be greater than before, and the flesh will grow larger, as I have said before; and if you see it becoming drier than it should, be careful that no pus comes in; take care of the wound with hot poultices each time you clean it, and every day; thus, you will cut off the pus from the limb, and mend what the flesh has done, so that the limb does not become distorted: this is harmful, and if it is not cared for properly, and I know of no other way than to wash with warm water and dry it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounds
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of wounds exist, and various shapes; for there are wounds made by the blow of a spear, and the bone is broken all through the bone, as if it were made by a hack or a fist; and therefore this kind of wound is called "hacking" wound.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	The spear breaks the bone through different senses of feeling, and this kind of wound is called "absolute" wound; and these are the wounds of these two great or small gashes.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is a percussion wound, or a cut or a piercing of the bone, or a piercing through the bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a continuous fracture, which approaches the tissue that is exposed to the bone or it is under the bone, and this wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If the wound is repaired in the bone as well as subtly as possible, and it is a small cut, and for this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by injuring the pierce, or by tearing, or by something seeming, and it lets the piece of the bone enter, and it is the same as when they burned the caustics when they were applying them to the burners; if it enters through the pierce.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let's examine all types of fractures by the methods used on them, and through the corrupted chart that is used.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the capital fracture is known by the fact that when the bone is discovered and touched, if the dark fracture is not open, it does not seem to be a capital fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care not to harm the patient, and if you see no other accident, such as vomiting of clear fluid, admission of understanding, extension, and pain, and fever, and the nails turning white and red, and other similar symptoms that cannot be cured with doubt, then...
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the first pain comes to you, and it is in the shoulder, then it is necessary to rest the bone before the fourth day at night that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is like this, then if you rest the bone before the ninth day, unless the cloth of the bone is corrupted, and the accident that we have mentioned comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes close to the cloth that covers the skull, then it is necessary to cut the broken part off: and it is that you cut off the head of the wounded patient, and uncover all the ways that you can, and reveal the wound in all its aspects, and if blood comes out, or pus, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with oiled flax; and rest the wound as long as the pus is stopped and secured from dislocation; then start to heal the bone, and it is done according to two methods of treatment: one method is that you cut at the end that is narrow, and it is in this form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he cuts another piece, larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many different sizes of blades, some thin and others wide, and they are sharp, and are made of iron; and you shape them gently so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and brittle, then you must perforate it with a drill, otherwise you should sharpen the blades with files, and do not make them too large, so that they do not go beyond the end of the bone; and you must have a margin or circle around the point that does not pass over the bone; and you must have more files, if each time you drill, as long as the bone holds up to your test; and this is the form of the three methods of files:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	1. The quality to assess the fractured bone is that you put wet cloth on the bone, and turn it over your two hands until you feel that the bone is perceived; then take the cloth away a little later, and then do everything else, and cut as incisions in the bone that is between the holes, and do it as subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, as you trace the bone with your hand, or with any of the traps that you have like needles, pincers; and keep away from the brain and the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and cut the bone, if it covers the wound that is made in the bone by any other instrument resembling an incisor, but it should be more fine and subtle than the other incisor; and if it does not make any small bones or scales, if the light bones are slightly scratched with the traps; then cure the wound with tents and bandages that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of opening is when it is said by the Galenic method, which is more accurate; and the force is very great, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, the fracture opening being exposed, so that once you have discovered this part, you will measure from the center of this incisional lenticular chief, and its form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the part is broken in two layers, if the cutting is towards the bone; then firmly press with a small maillet, so that you lightly touch the entire bone, and be well prepared for the thread that is opposite; if it is near the bone, if the bone is lightly touched, because it is sensitive to injury, and causes pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only covered by soft tissues, and it has small pieces, then cover those sharp edges with the subtle rasp that you must have several quantities of, to smooth out each bone according to its size and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you start with a coarse rasp and then switch to a more subtle one, and continue doing this until it is well-smoothed out.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair removal and subtle fracture treatments, you must adjust according to its address; and this is something that cannot be undone by the one who studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	1. If the dislocation is discovered, it comes to light that you must preheat the linen according to the size of the wound, and apply olive oil, then place another doubled bandage, such as II or III, and apply vinegar and olive oil, then place it over the first bandage; and do this more gently so as not to burn the face, then administer through other linen, and do not strain it too much, and leave it for one or two hours until the inflammation is calmed, then remove it and administer medicines such as roots of these plants, flour, powdered incense, aristolochum, and similar things; and from these things make a powder and place it over the wound and administer further medicines without burning; and wait until the wound is clean, so that you do not leave the ointment or assemble boils, because when boils assemble on the skin, they can cause great harm to the patient, as they can cause the malaise to spread widely; because when something mordant is placed on the face, it causes pain.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	When there is no accident that happens to the patient, if we have said so, then it is doubtful whether there is any doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no darkness comes forth except by medicine that has been given, then some virtue has, if you apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and mix it with water, and it is applied in various ways of cures until it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Wise men say that the two parts of the nose are never broken, or only one, for they are bones; and this is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut the small toe or index finger and make the break even with the natural shape of the nail; and do this lightly, and let the patient feel no pain through your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the part of the nail, and cannot be reached by the toe, then you should put it even with the tip of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the break is in the second part, then you should repeat this and restore the first toe; if not, after the ninth or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then cut the tip of the index finger at an angle, if the break is in a certain place.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	1. If you cut at another part, it will be; and the wounds are so large that they fill the cavities with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	2. And no restorer will say that one must smoothen the wounds in burrs, and each day dies.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	3. It seems to me that it is well, but they must be smoothed in the making of oven ash and bone powder; then leave the wound, as long as the bone is hard and the cartilage becomes strong.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	4. And never cut on the neck of the wound, and if it is soft and hangs down, and holds the thread, and smoothes the pain; or do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the wound is infected, come to the physician as soon as you can, for if you put on linen or cotton that is oiled with rose oil or in a vessel of digitalis, it will help.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is not infected, if you put on ointment made of flour of sulfur and incense powder, mixed with fresh eggs, then put on light sponges, and do not close the wound; and if the wound is small, and it is torn into small pieces, if it can be closed with stitches, then cut the stitches, and treat the wound with antiseptic ointments and powders, as well as able to close with stitches or bandages; and if there is no pain in the wound, then treat it with compresses and put on needles, until it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated, there is no cut, and the fracture is not severe, only slightly so, and not broken into pieces, but rather crushed like a nut, if you understand, lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then place your index finger on the right hand, gently press the fracture, and hold it with the other hand, and fix it.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	If the fracture of the lower jaw is healed in two parts, and it is equal, then you must administer extension to both parts.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If the teeth move or break, and they are pulled by gold, silver, or silk threads, then tie them around the broken lower jaw, and put on two large sheets; and put one of the sheets on the jaw, and tie it with a well-made nail or a piece of leather that fits the jaw, and tell the patient to rest, and feed him light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, and it moves to another place, and then put it back in its original position; and apply plaster of Paris with a lot of urine or flour of sieves, after you have set the broken jaw; and apply a light coating of plaster, and let it dry, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; three times it will be healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If the abscess bursts, then it is best to follow the instructions given earlier.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a fracture and a wound in the same place, treat it as a simple bone fracture. If the break is not severe, it can be treated at home.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is wide, enlarge it according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have all the bones in place and there is no pain, if the wound is wide, make sure it is clean and apply bandages as needed to prevent infection. Make sure the wound is dry before applying the bandage.
de la forcele	From the force of
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks more often in front of the shoulder, towards the elbow, and the break is in three ways: it is broken and disconnected in two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter one to restore; or it is a broken one with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the opening is when the break is with wound, if you have two assistants, that one paints the dislocated shoulder with the force of the break; and the other extends your collar towards the part; then place the break equal on both sides, so it forms as it should, and there should be no appearance or inequality.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have further experience, then place the shoulder blade of the patient at a distance from the body with a round or flat object, depending on the size according to your needs; and hold it firmly but gently in your hand so that you can even out the fracture as necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you do not wish to treat the head of the force with defense, because it comes from behind, then it may cause the patient's hatred to rise, and place the shoulder blade at a distance from the head, and bind the shoulder blade with the hair, as long as the bone of the force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find the fragments, it may be that you sell them; and take care of the lighter pieces, and if the bone does not join by any means with any part, if it is to one of the incisions you have made; but you should remove the force of this instrument for safety's sake.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should be as large as it can be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the wrist; and if there are two, if you see, and one is wide, and the others are narrow, if it is the swelling of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of aposteme chaut, if the wound is large, or if you doubt aposteme chaut, if you use the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if apoplexy comes suddenly, if many are in the olive oil and wine and vine, and they put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And the fracture of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is to put oil on the bone and apply a poultice of powdered milling and oak ash, and light sponge rolls, and a small drill at the fracture site; then take a large palm frond, then double the sponge rolls over the poultice, and press it; then take a fine needle of three to four inches long and long, and wrap it around the palm frond so that the bark remains; and put the needle on the fracture site, and turn the palm frond under the bark, and soak the clean bone in clean water, and soak the dirty bone in dirty water; and tighten each part, and when you see that the bark holds the sponge roll, and you see clearly that the needle does not stick to the bone brake, if the reward is for each jorn, and when the patient sleeps, if the restraint; and make the malady lie on his back, and he puts it when he wakes up a small orillier of oil on the bone, and raises the helper to his head; if the fracture is strengthened by the alignment of the shoulder blade, or by tying the arm to the collar, and does not slip out of hand due to accident, just XX jors; then resume the application, if you see that it has merit, and draw it and leave it as it is, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most XXVIII jors, and less in no man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the injury to the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and it does not fit on its own, and the bone does not match the figure of the break, and it is realigned according to its natural shape, in all ways possible; then put powdered milled wheat with a lot of urine, and light cloths, and put a wide and subtle pole, a little wider than the shoulder, and make it stay securely in any part of the shoulder, if you use linen threads, so that the pole stays even; then tie it tightly every time it moves, and look at the line each time; and whenever it relaxes, if it is tied, and put the pole back in its place as soon as it comes loose, and rub the wound on the chest; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days, and when these numbers are completed, if you are sure, because it is only a little that is laid on lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone is found to be ahead, and there is no cause for alarm, then it is removed, and the bone, and we do as we have said in the breaking of the force of the abscess chaw.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of a little
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in its place, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the joint.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken outside, if it is dislocated, and it causes great pain, and there is no soundness, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the doctors open the bones that are broken, and they seem well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the restoration if it is that the patient grips his shoulder with his hand, and puts a cloth between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two costals in your hands, and subtly put them equal to all ways you can, until the bone is as it should be; then put on bandages and splints around the subtle salt or other light material, and wrap it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and tie the belt around the back, and tighten it evenly, and reward each hour the leather, and if it loosens, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the shoulder, or pain or aposteme, if you haste, and it loosens, and rinse the cloth, and address what came from the ways of treatments; then re-tie the bandage and extract as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breast wound
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The wounds on the breast usually occur after a hard blow to the back, and at the base of the breast, and they only bleed a little because they are fatty; and it is well felt in the inquiry.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the dressings are made if you leave the wound even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then place the plaster, and tighten it with a needle, if you have the skill.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the wound on the breast is inclined towards the chest, it feels very painful and sharp, like tearing, because the bone points; and one should be careful, and often vomit large amounts of blood, and this is a sign of serious illness, and they have previously used strong drugs.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is said that it should be administered by feeding foods that inflame the stomach, by inserting the nipple into the mouth.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, as postpone does not come, if it is not present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, if it is the right one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And no one says that they put vinegar on the knee, for sweetening them, and it seems reasonable; however, doubt is if the vinegar attracts the excess to the knee because of its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And no one says that they should cover the knee with fine oil and put ten pins between the ribs to measure the hour accurately, then you should take care of the care of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure through the bone that points through the tissue, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the shoulder bone on the side of the broken rib, and put in an instrument to hold the face; therefore, one must open the bone, and dress it lightly, and then stitch the edges of the wound as much as possible, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If abscess formation occurs, then put on soft oiled cloths on the abscess, and cover the wound; and cure while the wound is in the process of forming an abscess, and wrap it with bandages or cloth as much as possible, until it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the break of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a break of the shoulder bone, and seldom does it happen; and also to the spine bone.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to no one, and you see whether it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Sadly, it is mortal in many cases, and if they are quiet and feel well when extracted and not, sadly the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if we put the cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of your bones, and the accidents that are in hands, and look at the back's jump and emission without will; and when it is sewn up inside the belly, if it jumps and emits without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sewn up on the back and it sees that it is swelling, if it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Cautions if it is mortal: if it does not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, then it is the more gentle thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient complains of pain when pricking, if it is an abscess, then put on an ointment made from rose oil or wool fat as soon as it is calmed; then apply a comfortable bandage and tie it, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where the pain is felt, as long as it is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	2. If any bones break, then put on a bandage as soon as it is calmed; and then sew up the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then clean the wound with unguent made from char, as long as it is healthy; and if the bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the knee," take your left hand's purse from your right hand, and put it on the other hand's palm, then apply the bandage and tie it, then draw it out, and if it breaks again, then cut it off, and set the bone and treat the wound as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the hip bone is broken, and if it is, not for a little adjustment of the head; then it becomes longer, the neck declines, and pain comes to the shoulder, the elbow, and the part that is broken, and swelling occurs in the broken part.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that if you extend your hand over it as long as you are over the fracture; and examine what the fracture and its appearance are; and if the fracture is only at the head, then place it in natural position, as long as it is in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines towards the dens, I advise the patient to lie on his stomach as much as possible, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you place the splint, then place a piece of flax or cord on top, and tighten the fracture as much as possible so that it does not move; and apply the leather to the costae, as long as the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess puss comes out, if it is not stopped, as long as the discharge is stopped, and place what we have mentioned before; then return to the restoration, and tighten it as much as possible, if there are no other accidents; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	The translation of "de la brisure de l’ajutoire" is "of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The translation of "Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres" is "The shoulder joint is the one between the shoulder blade and the shoulder bone of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, then it must be restored according to one of two methods:.
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	The translation of "Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sur le siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sur le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis peut su aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l'estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensemble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covoint" is "And the patient can lift both arms, and hold the arm with the dislocation up, then gently place the dislocated arm on the shoulder, until it returns to its normal position, and has a slight pain in the shoulder, then the patient can stretch it out with both hands together, as long as the dislocation returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is if one grasps the patient by their arm, and places their hand on their collarbone, then commands the ministers to touch the area where the bracelet is located on their hands, and then touches the other areas with their hand, and spreads them to each part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then pull the bracelet off, and remove it, and extend each of the ministers to their respective part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the bracelet is close to the shoulder of the arm, then it is necessary to make the wrists moist, and the other towards the elbow; and if the bracelet is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to make the wrists lightly, without labor, as long as the bracelet is even on the shoulder and elbow; then straighten the bracelet, as you can, and remove it, hold your breath until it does not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	1. If the arrowhead is drawn out, if it is not strained too much in seven days, and it is greased and oiled on both sides, as long as the arrowhead is calmed; then it is drawn out, and the manner of drawing it out, if you place the plaster on the wound, then assemble the arm with the aid, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and tie it, and draw out with the aid and with the arm, if the arm is in its place, nothing will stop you, or if the shaft is not bent.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use these and put the incision on a larger and stronger needle than the others, and have between each stitch two of space, and so have each stitch as large as it passes the cut; then pull on the stitches, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving them away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seating of the stitches and the pulling, as we have said, in the place where you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess forms, if you let it lie for three days, as we have said; then look at each third day's link, that pruritus does not cause inflammation or the nasal discharge comes to the member because it is too dry.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the patient follows the instructions, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no accidents occur, it should be done after three days or more, when the patient is asleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and place the splint firmly on the limb, evenly, and observe every hour during the day or night, when the broken bone does not move or become softened by the flesh; if the patient follows through with the power of medicine, and the meat we have prepared beforehand, in such a way that the meat is subtle; and when it is time to remove it, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the helper and the leg should be returned in 40 days or less; therefore, one must relieve and administer baths and medicines for the joint to recover.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the tightness is painful and hard, it should be relieved by loosening for 4 to 6 weeks.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the upper and lower "humerus," with one being larger and the other smaller, and the larger one is the head, which forms the shoulder; and the other is smaller, and is the neck, leading to the smaller one. By chance, only the larger humerus or the smaller one is broken, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light and the cure; but when the large ones are broken, it is often a poor cure, and more painful than when they were broken individually.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bones are broken, it is best to gently extend and put them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, they should be strained more firmly; and extend along the arm's crest, and lift the palm of the other hand higher than the other, and the fingers should be held against their own cheek, and the thumbs higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the remaining bones of the arm to the opposite part of the hand, either to the thumb or to another part.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the head in its place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, then he puts each in its place, and if there are none that point out how to put it back, and you cannot restore it in its place, then follow our advice and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken to the single cauterizer; if he takes care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration there are post-operative swellings, then make a poultice of oil of rose and wax blanc, neither too hard nor too soft, and gently wrap it around, as long as the swelling is appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then he cuts the bone, and puts the powder of the mill with a lot of urine on it, puts the plasters, and makes the cuff larger than the others; and he checks if there are VI plasters or arms in more positions: whether the cuff is in one of the bones, or in two; and pulls it more from the cuff that is closest, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and the powders that are under the cuff, which are wet and not too hard or rough, and the threads, whose ends are drawn out, are neither too long nor too short, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, if you must warm the member with hot water as much as necessary until the itching is relieved; then let the member rest in its place.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the stretching, and if the limbs are softened and the bones are loosened, and it seems so, then proceed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the wounds do not come to the member because it is too tight, because of which you must soften the member as much as possible, and let it rest for some time until the wounds heal, and then stretch it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If these things do not come to the patient, if they do not loosen the joint for twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the patient is not found, then the hands can be placed on his collarbone, and it should be even; and the collarbone should be settled with movement and adjustment, and it should sleep on its side; and it is hoped that this fracture is restored in XXX years or XXXV, and by chance in XX years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the wrist fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Hoping that on the back of the hand and in the wrist there are few fractures, and it only twists many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	When the plant of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient feels pain, and immediately stands straight in front of him evenly; then place the hand on the extended leg, extend the fingers of the broken bones, and put them evenly in the holes as they are well joined; then apply plaster and stitches, if necessary, then put a splint according to the amount of the leg; and wrap it in a fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is at the side of the abdomen of the plant, then make a sleeve of cloth, and instruct the patient to wrap it around their broken plant; then stretch from a long sleeve, and let it be as large as the plant of the hand, and stretch it, if it is possible.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the elbow, then it comes to pass that you place a splint on and another in the plant, if the hand is overstretched and straight, then the arm is completely tied, and the line is firm between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not come to any of the two, if it is bent, then it should be tied equally; and the elbow is lifted with the plant, and if you see that a splint is placed right and small for raising the fracture, and does not move; and if the fracture is in other parts, such as the index or one of the others, if it is bent, and the hand is held tightly, or a splint is placed on the healthy finger that follows; or you tie them all together, according to what is appropriate, or you place a splint on the plant, as I have said; and take care in restoration and disposition of the aperture chisel, and attend to what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken bone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the shoulder is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; the restoration is if it is possible to rejoin the fibers of the fracture, and the other one is left.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient groans when he looks at his face, and then extends each muscle of his limb evenly; and it is when the fracture is removed from the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, then one or more of the muscles turn away from the point of impact, and the others are pulled back by the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And when it has reached the groin, and then separate the ligaments of the groin, and stretch the extension; then place the bone equal to its two hands, as it is according to its natural figure, and then place the template, and the socket, and the joint, does not move if it comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has been strained, if it is left to be soothed then return to your work and your care; the wound is made in part like this.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the knee with a bandage I bend double in II or III, and remove the surplus, then bend the leg as much as the heel comes to the root of the nail, and place one string between the thigh and the leg, loosen the groin of the bandage, and turn the leg and the thigh back the bender; then turn the leg and the thigh back the bender, then put the bandage on the knee, and put an estee on the bone of the knee; then place the lee vuit between the knee and the thigh to make the strap equal to the knee and thigh, and start to tie for form III or IV on the bandage; and as more you add to the bandage, and less the tightens; then take out II strings that you have tied between the knee and the thigh, and the III estee that are on, and return to the chief of the string, as you see the petticoat; and the strap, if it does not move from its place, then let it be, then leave it, then it will not aposteme or flesh out any other appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it leaves, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if it has pieces of the bone that prick, if it can be; and if not, then it can be cut and drained; and the cure, as we have said, depending on how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the cheek broken unless it is set in its place when we put on the dressing or the arm; however, in the restoration made later, it does not click with the patient's pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And one should be sure that the cheek is restored in L jors, or at least a little less, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the girl's joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the girl's joint there are few breaks, but it twists many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is not necessarily a fracture or a perforation, but it comes to all wounds and feels like a wound, and it is not well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put back what has been separated as much as possible, and then place the plaster, and put a round stone, if you have one, and tighten it as much as possible, then reward all the dispositions we have said for other fractures, such as aposteme chaut and other similar ones; and for every accident, if it comes to what is necessary, as much as it is possible to be healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the injury to the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "true" by right, not "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and all the breaking is like that of the arm, and therefore the restoration is done in the same way as that of the arm properly. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, then it is felt with great pain and seen that it is well; then turn away.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	1. Therefore, extend it evenly, and place it perfectly aligned; however, it is necessary to ensure that the fracture is not severe, and if there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And when you have completed your wound, if you have hair that is purple on one side and green on the other, and is long enough to reach from the knee to the ankle, then wrap it around the leg and tie it at the ankle, and lay it along the leg, and do not let the leg deviate to the right or left, and it is well; and no one has caused pain in the leg, and it was done with twine, and he puts it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly made it at the fracture or wound; and shake each leg every day to see if there is any swelling or other accident; if the cure is as soon as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of the bones so much pain
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle never has a fracture, but the bones so much pain never have a fracture and you must put, and it only comes that it is bent in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones so much pain are fractured, and you see these bones overturning on one another, then put as many pillows as you can under the part that is on the ground, as if you were flying, and then now place your foot on the other side, until the bones come up; then press as much as they want to in their legs; then put the splint and stitch, and then sew the belly of the ankle with a small turn, then draw it towards the knee, then when you have covered the wound with bandages, and other things that you have knowledge of.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, you will find the bones unevenly split, broken, and dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are two broken bones, if they are repaired, as we have said, with the hand; then put a splint on one of the breaks according to the length of the bone, and make it wider than the other; then tie the joint that I have mentioned, and tighten the splint; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, if you put one on each according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and tighten the joint around the peg; and make sure it is placed at the top of the socket, so that it stains well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, as soon as we have said them; and treat each accident in the same way that it comes.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone fracture of the little finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's bone is broken, if it is made to fit, then it bends towards the side of the shoulder, and is held by the hand; then fill the nature of the cloth with the woman's bone, and put it as large as possible; then lower the woman's shoulder little by little, and gently, until the cotton comes out of the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the cloth; and when she sees blood, if the cotton is wet, and when she has bled, it is reinserted, and left in place for seven days or more: if the fracture is restored, and you see it, take a basin of water, and tie a string around the nipple, and blow all the water into the nature; then form the string in the nature, until the basin is empty: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it alone for several days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the elbow is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the elbow of the horse; and these fractures are not hidden that those who study and use it, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in more directions the right way of restoration: understand the doubt.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the neck, when it is broken, take an goose's grip and bite the neck; then wrap the drapes around, and leave it three turns outside or inside, and it will be cured quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, just as it is large, if it is like the bone of the shoulder or elbow, or seems, that he is now healthy, if those wounds that we have mentioned testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is that it becomes inflamed, and you have nothing else, then resume to repair the fracture in the same hour, or the next day, if you do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if you do not come the next day, if you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as you are calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you will make the coming harm worse.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken, it should be set as soon as possible, so that you can place it gently in your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not easy to make with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight feet long, and the length should correspond to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary to make three or four passes, according to the number of times you have to compress the break; and so it should be firm but not too tight, and it should be in front and large before, and then gradually reduce it behind:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palinche", because it is intended that the shoulders be placed on the head of the apparent bone; and the buckle once, as it rises, and be even on the other side.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is not clear, and the straps cannot well hold the bone, then it comes to pass that you cover the head of the bone with the strap, as long as the straps are in position.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you do not bring the bone back, as we have said, if you cover it with an instrument that is suitable for this, or cutting or sharp, then you should return to the bone that has been made rough and full of small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is realigned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it is suspected that there is something wrong with their natural joint.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you hang it long enough in its joint, then dip it in a piece of black, stiptique linen, and do it properly, as it should be; and do not put anything else on the wound or other parts that are oily, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption. Then dress the wound with appropriate medications after you have restored the bone, leave the wound exposed, cover it with a cloth according to the size of the wound, and make sure the wound is not stretched with the break; many times the patient has had this experience, and it has caused the patient to die or rot at least once; and the scars become softer and more glistening than the other scars.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	When the wound is large or severe, and you doubt that it will heal, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, but you cannot put on splints; then envelope the limb in cloth, in the limb of the splint, tie hard knots, and glue.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, and if everything goes well, and you put a salve on the wound, and if the salve is a safe remedy for wounds, and it looks like this.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to untie the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limb is aligned in a certain way that the bow can be easily passed.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to pass, and it cannot be held back but rather moves away from the bow, it has small pieces of bones, because it is necessary that you close the wound with a tent, and all these fragments that cause this pain, take them out.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if an abscess comes to the shoulder, or any other form of corruption, and it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed through the limb, if it is like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, or other similar bones of the large limbs, if it is not treated, because often death comes, but it is left as long as it bleeds; by chance it may heal after 20 days or 30, and then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, let it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of the cold things that come out of heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the joint, and it is even when it is near the joint, and it is a matter to see how the member is figured; and by chance, it cannot make the limbs its own nature.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it is cold, then it is well: if it is treated with strengthening medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, and other similar things, if you do not take any of these things or all together, and mix them with warm wine, or with a large amount of urine, or with honey; and then apply them to the wound, and pull it out well, and do not let it slip from your hands; and then pull it out, and start another one, as long as the nodations are osteal; or you pull out a piece of plaster well made; for the property of the plaster is such that all the enflames in the limbs are converted into durtitude, and it becomes like a piercing when it is osteal, and it is painful to the bone, if the raseur is applied, and the superfluity is removed; or you leave it with no one, as long as it is osteal, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb that is after the imprisonment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	After the fracture is restored, and weak after the weak members and subtle, if there are any causes: either because one was too tightly bound, and not as it should have been; or because it had too many ligatures, and could not come to the member; or because of multiple inflammations; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because it has little blood in its body, and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And if the cure is that you make the patient drink vinegar, and make the body tense as much as possible without multiplying in him; then give him warm water, and he will soon feel relieved; then put poultice on the member, if it attracts the great inflammation, and the swelling often turns green, until the inflammation reaches the member; and then restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The dislocated limb after the healing process
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is swollen after restoration, and the bone is openly broken, and the shape of the dislocated limb is deformed, it does not correspond to its natural form: if one does not believe the folk who say that the bone must be broken completely at once, and all others have done this in our land; and these bones are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and by chance the death occurs; however, if the swelling and pain are fresh, then it is necessary to raise them with hot water, or herbs that soften, if like spongy things, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and I apply a softening agent, as well as I can, and take the mucilage of spongy things, and cook with fat of linseed or olive oil, and apply; or take ripe figs, and crush with colon fiber, and similar medicines that dry the sweat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is there where the node is held continuously and long with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb at any hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awakened and made to hurt, as well as the incision, and it requires the forge at the bone, then cope with it as much as possible; make it smooth and light, and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it now comes to bring sense to the target.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we are late, and it is seen, and by chance it is reset to the shoulder; because it does not come to move the ear when it is swollen: many times sent pain and other pains are caused: always, when this happens, I make the patient healthier, then let him, as long as the abscess is closed, treat the limb with warm oil and oil, then gently reset the limb, and cure each member as it was cured in its shoulder.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the cauteries for the dislocations of the shoulder bones.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are two ways in which the mandibles are dislocated: either they are slightly crushed at their base, and become malleable; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and causing saliva to flow from the mouth that cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue is wrapped around with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it returns through the more common positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it as soon as possible without force; and in such a way that the patient's hand teaches the surgeon how to open the mandible, and with the other hand hold the lower part of the dislocated mandible, which is divided into two parts; and the other two hands are deflected to make them equal; and instruct the patient to make the mandibles malleable, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she measures it evenly, as it fits in her hand.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to return it, then it is the second and third molars, as the arrows of hot and oily oil, until they are lightly returned; do not force too hard to return it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth feels very relaxed, if you apply soft, moistened cotton balls made of olive oil and wax to it, then gently press on the teeth; and the patient lies down on his back, and his head is between the knees, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor struggle too much, but chews gently on lean meat, as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws; and then take what you have gently pressed, and do not force your mouth open with your fingers and mouth, as long as the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaw bones cannot be set within an hour and are not converted to their original position, if fever and chills set in, and by chance solution comes from the stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times have died those who came, in nine years.
de la forcelle	of force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be removed from the cost, due to the continuation of the hand and the foot, and it is always dislocated at the end, and it is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is when the patient gazes at the masseter and extends his arms; then press on the palm of the hand, it will return; then place the splint and the bandage, and tighten; and the one who is towards the cheek cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated never, then reset it at the shoulder, as we have said; then place the splint and the bandage, and tighten, and command the patient to rest as soon as he is healthy; and then realign the head of the scapula, when it is released from the shoulder.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways for the shoulder to dislocate: either it dislocates at the acetabulum of the hip socket; or at the deltoid muscle; or by accident, at the acetabulum; and seldom, at the scapula, and not by the nerves; and more often towards the acetabulum, especially for those with little shoulder bone, because in this jump it is very hard; for those with enough shoulder bone, the jump is few, and returns to few.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by accident, it happens to some men with trauma or dislocation, and the shoulder is dislocated from an abscess, and make sure it is re-dislocated.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known the dislocations when they are towards the axle, and there is a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them clear diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and then the axle at the bottom of the shoulder's head, just as if it were some other ones; and it cannot bring its hand to its neighbor, nor move any movements; and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you see it clearly at the axle; and this way of dislocation is not easily returned, when it is new, or if it is caused by a patient.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the physician gently places his hand on the patient's shoulder, then removes your hands from the joint, and gently relaxes it at the top of the arm; the physician gently places his hand, extends it upwards, and places it beside you; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands just now, if the physician should immerse the patient's shoulder in warm water; the physician gently softens and soothes it, like a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in warm water, and is soothing; then he places the patient's shoulder on his back, and places a bandage on the elbow properly, not too soft or too hard, and places the patient's foot on the bandage, and gently relaxes the shoulder muscle, and trains the physician's hand; and other physicians trace the shoulder muscle, if it does not move at all; this shoulder is now returned, and if you see that it follows in this manner: and that you face the larger shoulder; and it should be turned towards the chest, and bend the elbow away from the shoulder of the physician, and gently raise the elbow, if the shoulder hangs downwards; and other physicians train the physician's hand over the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then with him there is nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is done in another way: and it is like this: and the bandage is made of long grass in the earth, whose ends are as a pin, and not too big or too rough; then it is put around the patient's neck, but if it has been braided enough, and the neck is too long and thin; then it is stretched out from one hand to another part, and the joint returns to its place quickly; and if it does not return in all these things that we have said, then this cure must be done: take two bands of one arm and four of the other, which have the ends inserted into the mouth so as to enter frontally from behind the ear, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the bone that was split, which was not broken by the patient, then place it in the cradle of the bone; and extend some of the arms over the long bone, and the helper over the shoulder, and the arm at the wrist of the hand, then put the arm on the shield of a wide shield, and extend the hands on the other side: the joint was now mended.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is set, in whatever way that may be, if you happen to put the cradle of a spindle of even thread on one side, and then put the pasteur with incense and wool of oven all over the shoulder and the ribs, then tighten the cradle on the other side, and turn the lace on the pasteur, and wrap the hand around the arm, and let the hands remain in place.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	1. It is necessary that he drinks little, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it heals faster; then drink more after the fourth or seventh day, and move it; and if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	2. And if the joint is stiff due to moisture that it has come, or for another reason, then you must apply cauteries at three points, as it is placed in front of or behind the cauteries in the chapter.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	3. And if you do all this, and after seven days, the joint does not hold, and cannot raise the arm forward, then suspect that the nerve at the shoulder of the elbow is compressed or extended or softened; and suspect that the joint will never fit in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first sentence to translate: "Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	After the healing comes pain in the member, and then movement, if the patient uses hot water many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	The dislocation is expensive
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	The joint that is expensive is repeatedly dislocated, and it returns to its original position; and it becomes dislocated in all directions, and even front and back, and the dislocation is not well replied because it can be seen and felt well; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the expensive remedy with the clean one, if you see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is thin, and cannot be shaved of the arm, nor touch its spine at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it always with the help of an assistant, because if it is not reset with the help of an assistant, it would be difficult to return; and by chance, it cannot be reset at all, even when it is in its place; rather than other dislocations, and it is more painful, and by chance it comes to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it is in place, you can return it with your hand; and his arms are expanded, and his hands are held according to the course of the bone, from the top to the bottom, and he bends the joint at the root of his palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when it doubles its hand on its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to the shoulder, then it is given a strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm in each part, then wrap a long and wide double strip around it; and when the patient touches the joint with the joint of his hand, if no oil can smooth the joint, then form the joints, as it re-emerges; and when it is at the shoulder, put a dry cloth with cow dung on it, and stretch it, and can the arm at the bottom of the patient's cheek, and leave some hairs, then let it go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	When the joint is tight in its place, if it does not move, and is left alone; and if you see that the joint is not tight, then re-tighten the splint and the joint, and leave it for some time until it is firmly fixed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it becomes still, if he bathes and rubs gently, and presses until it is calmed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's wool dressing, then leave it for one night and the bone, and let it enter a bath; and when it comes out, rub the joint thoroughly, then remove the wool dressing, and then enter or bathe twice or three times until it is healthy; and if you see, if you put on fat sheep's moistened and warmed with a brush, and pull it off; if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is gentle, more than other joints. It is necessary to bring it back to the socket immediately, while it is dislocated, even if the arm is shortened, or if there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you place the hand on a table and extend the fingers, and measure the length of the hand, if it fits perfectly, and you put your palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it as much as it can, then it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in the socket; then place the hand on the back of your palm on a table at extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	When the dislocation is at the back of the hand, if he puts his hand on his back against the table, and he looks, he puts his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well if it does not, for the strain of the plasters that cause pain can be relieved by letting it rest.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put the dislocated joint on the arm after some time, then the joint will become more tight; and do not doubt that as long as the hand is inflamed, no thing can be strained; therefore, you should know whether it is a nerve or an artery; if there is no other remedy than cauterization in this case, and by chance it does not work, then there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at the shoulder, if they are placed on the speculum that we have mentioned, then it is stretched and left for the joints, then it is removed and left in its place.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no pain, then the hot wet clyster, and the rub as much as it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never has been dislocated the hand once in any part, never at the back of the palm or in the belly; therefore it is locked, and the dislocation is brought to the part where it is dislocated, then hold the chief of the locked hand, and let it go to the part from which it was dislocated; and leave it there, and then put it again, and do as we have said, when the joint is stretched, and make it move, and tie it again; and do this often, as long as it is tight, and also do this when it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as we have done before, when it is stretched; and also do this, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the shoulder bone of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder bone of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, because the patient dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign that the patient throws up and cannot hold it down, and many times the limbs are softened, or the elbow, wrist, or shoulder, or I. And many times the dislocation is reduced to 4 parts; that which is reduced in the back is called "girdle"; the cure is that you reward if the girdle has come from childhood: if there is no cure or sanation for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from cutting or percussion or such things, they call it the old methods of healing by large words, or it has no effect at all; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed stitches in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gillboard that comes before, there is no health; and also that which comes directly in the second costa, and can be cured only if it is properly done on the back, as I say; and that the patient's skin is extended evenly on the face, and has no strain on it, so it does not become hard; then form the bandage on the head on the earth, and the other as pieces, and tie them with threads through the patient's nails, and the hairs; and two ministers tighten the bands, one at the head and the others at the pieces, among the II ties; and they should be well closed, the bandage as we have said, and the mire puts his hands on the spikes forming, as it rises.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, take a third arm of long length, cut off the end, and have the patient's arm in coste, then cut the head of the tortoise desoz the end, then put the mileu of the tortoise on the spine; then place the mirses of the other tortoise head on the other end of the tortoise, and press well until it returns to the leu; and if you see, do the same for the turtle that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is it that you have two knots on the head of the patient's arm of long length, and turn the other two, and there should be a thumb of long length between each knot, doubled and unknotted; and there should be a knot in each with a tightening turtle, so that they do not move; and between each knot there should be one turning, regardless of the direction the turtles turn, and there should be two petits tisons of long length to turn the turtle; and then lay the rope that is among the fastenings of the turtle towards the head, and the other rope towards the paws of the other turtle, and each minister turns their turtle with the whole rope, and the masters put the spine equal to what we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When the joint is equalized, if it is moistened with a drying powder with a lot of urine, and then washed, and then the anesthetic of a tablet of III for too long, which whitens the gilberry part and the healthy part of the spine, then it is tied with a string, as we have said, and subtle sedatives are used until it is safe; and nothing comes out of the health in the end, if it comes to administer ointments that soften and emollients, with the anesthetic we have mentioned before; and never once does one administer a piece of plaster, and never does one come the appearance at the back of the spine of the tailbone, and one must make sure that this is not dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one does not have to have too much presumption: by chance it could come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The shoulder joint and the shoulder blade joint are only dislocations, unlike other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four parts: anterior and posterior, and medial and lateral; and more anterior, and less posterior, and less medial and lateral.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of the shoulder dislocation is that if the healthy leg is jointed with the affected one, it is longer and more open than the healthy one, and cannot double its genu at the fire; and it is the one who is lame due to abscess chaut, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one who comes to the cauterization, if this accident is against these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who comes to the front, if they are well in his leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the genital area with pain, and if you see it happening before, do not allow urination, and cleanse the anus, and when he goes, if it passes through the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who comes to the rear, if he cannot expand his genital area, nor double, and that leg is more tortured than the other, and the anus is relaxed, and the head of the shoulder is pressed against the costal cartilages.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The first sentence to translate is: "If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	1. And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, there are four ways to reset it: if you can return the joint, and it should be flexible and deflated, and the limb should be straight and bent; by chance, if it returns, and there is no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	1. If it does not return in this way, then it may be necessary to use strong measures: if you can hold the leg firmly with two hands or one arm, or with the limb that is closest to the knee; and other measures include spreading your hand widely so that your fingers do not touch your nails, then gently pull on the leg with your free hand; and others lift the head of the limb; and stretch it up and down as long as the patient remains on the ground and does not fall.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not work, it is necessary to apply treatment to the appearance. When the dislocation occurs in the jaw, it is necessary to place the therapist's hand on the healthy side of the cheek, then tighten the tie on the root of the tooth, and the other side that is thin, then stretch the tie towards the force; then apply other treatments to the patient's arms, and wrap the largest joint of the malformed tooth, and extend it as the deformed: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	1. And if you do not hold the joint in this manner that we have said, then it comes to pass that you feel the two feet of the maimed man assembled as a very strong leash on the two ankles, and on the two thighs, and so the maimed leg is extended twice as much as the other; then it is hung from the neck of a post, and is suspended from the earth with two arms; then command the minister to embrace the head of the chest, and have other ministers hanging with the maimed man, who embrace form the chest, because the joint now returns in a straight manner.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	1. And when the dislocation is at its worst, if the maimed man has a growth, as we have said in him who has a growth, and trains the leash on the maimed leg properly, and on the thigh; then tie the strings, the head and the other as the feet, then place the knot between the chest of the maimed man in his form; and let it be planted with wet cloths so that it does not hurt the maimed man, then extend each minister towards him, and he puts them equal in his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's bad.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place the table as we have said in the gilbositeit, and press it according to our instructions, and apply the dressing to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the painful leg, as we have said; and then place the painful foot on the opposite hand, and pull back towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, and it is not possible to extend the painful leg as we have said; and then lift up from the ground, and make it as it was when it was dislocated at the back, as we have said earlier; and then extend the limbs so that they are equal, and press them on the table; and it will be time when the leg is extended, and it will be even; then adjust the crutches, and the plaster, if the leg does not move; and rest for three or four hours, then remove the plaster, and see if the limbs are equal, if the plaster is removed as before, and leave them for three or four hours, then remove the plaster, and allow the patient to walk as soon as the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should be bent and pulled back, and not in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If you command the patient to bend their knee towards their thigh and it does not move at the knee, then they are dislocated; and the restoration is if you make the patient straight, extend the leg if possible, put your back on theirs, and put your foot between theirs; then take the shoulder with your hands, and stretch the two first fingers of the shoulder as much as it revives to its place, and the signs are that the knee was bent towards the thigh lightly; and apply the plaster, and make the leg rise at the thigh, and assemble the fingers together for three or four times, then remove it; and do not work too much on the patient's knee until the member is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not present, if extension is administered forcefully, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, but rather bent and twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is if the ankle is swollen, and before reaching the part where it is dislocated: the fingers are lighter, and it should be stretched gently with one's hands as soon as possible.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, if you can manage to sit with the affected leg straight, and tension the ankle with your hand, then pull the toe towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand, and then again with your right hand, and then pull it up, and gently push the toe up; and do this twice, as we have said, by stretching and pulling the toe up, and if it returns, that is good; but if not, if you continue the treatment, it will return; and if it cannot be returned, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and hold the knee firmly on the ground with both hands, and let the ankle hang loose; then trace the knee with your other hand, and stretch the toe out to your hands or to the other leg, where the knee is located; then stretch all the fingers equally, and the patient should hold it between the knees to keep the knee in place; then place the knee gently at the dislocation, and trace the healthy leg at the other end, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When the dislocation occurs, if it is immediately covered with plaster and poulticed, and the bandage is formed, and the leg is tied to the thigh, where the tendons are at the ankle joint, that the ligaments should not be too tight; then it is left for II to III days, and if the bandage is loosened, then the ligaments are relaxed; then the bandage is changed every IV days, and if it advances to the end of this term, it is not a mistake that the dislocation has not been corrected.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, if it is necessary to lance it, then it should be lanced, and as we have said before, as long as it is healthy.
des dois	Of two sorts, one is a dis
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are reset, if they can be extended well in the work, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no doubtful place on either side of the shoulder, then you must set it in the joint above or below, that is, straight. Then put your foot on the part where the joints open, and press firmly with your foot until it re-opens; and when it is equal, if it does not open, then place a table at the head of the shoulder, then form it, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and let it rest, as long as it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your treatment, whether you are skilled in the art and have not used it long, or whether you are merciful and compassionate and slow, do not be presumptuous; and at the beginning of things, use soothing remedies for the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to the bone immediately, unless the abscess has burst and is vomiting; and when the limb is at the bone, if it is swollen and inflamed, apply soothing remedies for the wound and cure it, as necessary, using desiccants; and if there is a break with dislocation, and the bones are sharp, if the bones break, then make them straight according to what we have said in simple diseases; and do not enter into a state of despair, according to what I have said, for this is good according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your heart.
Amen	1. For the fire c
