O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine, the fulfillment of it, and made the end through its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my vision that I have fulfilled this book with this surgery, which is part of the work of hands, it is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is rejected in every way, if it is perceived by science and knowledge, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in books that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this has led to the error and vanities, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	I seem that I could revive it by assembling the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come together the forms of firebrands of cauterization and other tools of the work with the assembly of the declaration and preparation of it, as he is skilled.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no one of the hands masters is found in our hands, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and to have knowledge of the bones, the nerves, the muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the limbs, and the issue of the same.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Ypocras says that with the non it is not made, and with the work it is few.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and likewise in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that who is not acquainted with things before said, if he will make it without error and not deceive the men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	I have many times wanted to write about these who come into this science and if they abandon this science and sense experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	I see a madman who cuts off the scrotum of a woman and cuts the collateral arteries of her neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flows out that the woman dies in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I see another madman who treats a piercing of an old man and the piercing was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	if he carried with him a piece of the bladder, and he died the enemy in three years.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I had not yet been called to treat this wound, and I saw the position of the patient and the size of the wound, and if it was not cut well, he died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I see another madman who cured the duke of our land who had a broken leg and with the fracture there was pain.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	And the patient's ignorance tightens the wound on the wound as it has been done by a strong time, and does not leave any pain in the wound, and leaves it in its final state.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commands that it should not be loosened.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and waited until the leg was all swollen and the foot came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called upon to come to him, and I hurried to free the leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I loosened it, it was in pain but did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the paths of his corruption were already confirmed or member, and it could not be cured.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption spreads to the arm as long as the limb is completely wasted.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another reason why it will fall and be enchanted, and then burned by the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is free of melancholic matter, only one thing can be done if it is not in its entirety the part that can be completely cured of what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	it is to know whether it is safe or if there is more risk in other positions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each case of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	And it is important that you keep this in mind, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your weapons in hand, and your physicians lightly but firmly, and use the best method if by God's grace you come to health and be strong.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	Et leave the terrible diseases of grief in health.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And put your weapons aside because of what you doubt, and be sure in yourself that you can come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen's advice is given in no uncertain terms.
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take medicine for illness without first consulting a wise physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have heard this treatise is discussed in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cautery and medical cauterization, and this is the ordered chapter for the physician up to the point.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of stitches, and of the forceps for cauterization, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and perforating, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and order the chapters and the forms of the stitches.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered of the loosening of the joints and the forms of stitches.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, if we remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and no less for each complexity.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the quality of aid, and not harm, is the longest speech and the most subtle science and the secret remedy.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many spoke of the arrows, and they agreed to this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And they speak a little of their words, for I question their age.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that burning helps universally with all complexions or matter, however, the complexion:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	It is to know that hot complexion has matter, and dry complexion has matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry complexions, they all have matter, and they say that burning is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other says the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that burning is not good for disease that comes from choler and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of hot fire is hot, and should not be curative for hot disease by choler, nor by dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And then comes the one who says that cauterization does not help with the disease of heat and dryness that comes into the hearts of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the chest of the patient and its moisture on the complexion of fire, you must quickly close the chest.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And all ways should be avoided as much as possible by him who has experienced it and knows the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the spaciousness of tens.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no cause, just as in cold and damp diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And then they are supposed to fit together and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization is a fire if it contains secrets of healing, and even more beneficial than fire medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and only comes to harm to the member it is cooked in, and does not hurt other members.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines come from one part of the body to another by moving them, and they bring diseases of grief to the healthy condition.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And by chance, the patient was caught.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	I had it for its height and for the goodness of its substance, which does not do harm, if it has no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I found it through experiment and the length of service and study I have given to this art, and it is true in things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and because I apologize for the length of my speech, as I only like to tell you the secret that is contained in fire or water, and the quality of the work, as it affects the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says when demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Know, son, that the burns should be made in certain ways and not too tightly.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	I say that cauterization is useful in all cases, because the wounds are not properly cared for by the help of cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is useful for necessary pain and haste, which cannot be waited by the greatest malice that comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think less, dear fellow, if they follow the example of the master.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	and he says thus.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so with everyone because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion, and drys the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines for hastening the courage, and for the virtue of his work and his nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease grows once according to the complexion of the patient and the strength of the disease and its virtue.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And the surplus is acquired by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if not cauterized, it is administered to the patient or they have little surplus and moisture, just like cauterization for toothache, and the similar things, and part of the pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	But this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand that cauterization is called the end of medicine, and this is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they only believe that cauterization is useless after medicine, but they understand it to be false, and it is cauterization of medicine because when we have means of treating any disease in no way they are effective, therefore we administer our cauterization and it is useful.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	However, it is well understood that cauterization is part of medicine, even if some do not agree with this.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauterization of instruments of gold was as deadly as of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that cauterization of the lees does not make any difference, but this is not true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	For the golden cautery, it is worth as much as iron, if they say so.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And you know when you are heating an instrument of gold, you do not feel it when it is heated by the color of gold, and it has cooled down the most.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if you heat it too much.
si font au feu;	If they put it in the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and it has enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that's why we use fire cauterization in our work because we have already used it.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or if you have ordered this chapter of the small joints, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	oil cauterization is useful for moisture and cold in the eye socket, and when it is caused by a disease called "soda", and by many humors that descend to the small joints as the ears, and the ears, and by numerous sleeps and tooth pain and throat pain, and even by all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and semblances of diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that if the patient is purged by medicine soluble modifying the throat III or IV, according to which virtue and courage and accustomation of the patient he can bear it.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then do the head of the patient again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	Then place the patient's head between your hands, and put your hands on either side of it.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After, place the root of your palm on the root of his nail between his two fingers.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And if your two fingers come together, it will bleed, and then wash the fire cautery which is called "olivare", which is in this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the thumb's signet of ink, and then slowly and gently pull down and stretch your hand a little at a time, and gently.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then gently relax your hand, and reward the nail if you see the first bone is very small.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, if the cauterization resumes as soon as you see the bone, like I told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after taking hold of the needle, and putting on some soft cotton, and placing it on the leg, and leaving it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after sewing with a fine thread.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it until the burn is completely healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacone", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And tell him that as the wound becomes older, it purges more.
et por ce si aide mues.	And for this reason, assistance is needed.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that too much fatigue is needed for the cauterization, but rather part of the bone should be burned, and then what is burned is removed, and it is treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the other is that one should shave as long as possible, and then stick it as hard as possible into the bone until it is as wide as the woman's vulva, because the humors flow out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And one should shave the overgrown wound long.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After that, it should be cured and soothed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be the best in any way, since in no man has it been found that there is fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And I think that I should leave it alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And similarly when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more gentle and painless for me, and I therefore use it in order to assemble salute.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	1. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the entire shoulder comes with chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, if it must use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purification of the shoulder and oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And when you make the cauterization that we have mentioned before, it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	The head of the shoulder is dislocated when the patient is very sick and it is not too tight.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Therefore, the fire cautery should be used on that part as we have previously described.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After the fire cautery is applied to each corner of the shoulder joint as we have previously described, and then the fire cautery is applied to the part that is called "thongs".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and they are held in place with ventouses.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and hold your hand tight if you do not see the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak to you later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the burns on the corners be more sensitive than those made on the child's head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When there is sudden pain in the head of the child, and it spreads throughout the body, and the head is purged with medicines, and the other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of them benefit much.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore, I make the burns in two ways, that is to say, with medicinal herbs and with iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The burn made with medicinal herbs is if you take a dose of alum, and it helps to remove the scar and the rupture, and then they make the temple where the pain is held in a way that you can put the dose of alum back on the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is reset, if the limb is held well and left alone for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then remove the bandage and apply a poultice of oak gall, leaving it on for two to three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then dip your finger in vinegar as much as possible and press the wound.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the application of ointment, when it is healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that any of these remedies for curing are not working, or if you have treated any medicines for curing and they did not work, then.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron burn is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron burner in this way:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a cloak or has one hole for the beak, and appears to be small in size.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And he puts the painful shoulder on his hand, and hold your hand and gently pinch the iron until the half of the second that is long.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And hold your hand that the artery does not burn, which is cold, and there is abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After putting cotton on a needle, and put on the shoulder for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I put woolen cloth in a burr, and then treat the shoulder with ointment until it is healthy;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you want to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all points, and keep the artery in this wound that is not too near.
de emigraine	of embolism
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you cure migraines as we have described in divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before speaks of medicine and hard iron, therefore it is necessary that you walk the cauterization which is called "cultellare" as it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and always keep the joint straight as if it were a line of half a dozen lines, and hold your hand once, and press so that you do not squeeze the artery and do not turn around.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and cover the mandible that moves when it is cut, and the nerves only have motion and spasm does not reach the patient, and cover the artery dislocation of blood when it is squeezed, or squeezed has great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the wound heal in its path.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	However, I will tell you that blood clots when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the wound in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cauterization that we have described or the chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterization that has two edges.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	2. due to cold ears
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	3. When pain occurs in the ear due to cold, and it is treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then use this cauterization that is called "points", and its form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After the patient has turned their entire head towards the ear, and holds the affected ear in both hands, and you carefully remove a small amount of fluid from the root of the ear because you have felt the ear loosen;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and it has been X points towards each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the ear until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torment that must be treated by cauterization is those that move due to inflammation, as we have said in divisions of the disease.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make cauterization as if they come from scratching and sweating of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is silent from the fumes of urine and spit of gargle and throat, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you burn the patient with three burns.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One at the root of the ear, and the other a hole burns the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And puts the burn in the part that opens healthy, and he makes the burn in the place where the head of the ear is, and a hole burns the cornea of the ear, and another in the temple as long as some holes.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leave the cauterization as long as it does not hurt too much.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the appearance of cauterization that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle and it should be a little larger:
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the head as I have said before, as long as it is healthy:
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then I have done four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	I cut off the two horns of the head, and I removed the head, and I also cut off the part called "vasels" as we have said before, and it was cauterized at the mouth of the stomach:
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs and drugs that modify the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After the patient's head is treated, and they place it on the Occiput, with the suture of sinapi that is written or treated as ointments.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the way to cauterize:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is not healthy, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not healthy, make three cauterizations of the head descending from the top to the neck, and leave a space between each cauterization of one and two large ones.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	When the patient is treated like the others, and if you see assistance, and the patient is suffering, you perform the burn cauterization in environment.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when skills are needed, there are two at the two corners, and the care until it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And the burn cauterization called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and what we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After the patient is washed with the physician, then I perform the burn cauterization on the head and at each corner, and the buttocks and three at the spine.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	If you have more skill in this area, and the heart is wet and the patient is sweating, and the disease is advancing, if I make four cauterizations on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it stay as long as the pain is the greatest, and hold your hand gently;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure as long as it is healthy, and the cauterization we call "olivare" that we mentioned earlier;
de l’epilempsie	Of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should only be treated with fire cautery, and it must first modify the brain of years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffers from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is children who cannot endure it, make a gargle and masticate with the brain often with raw meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the child has been in the environment, and I make the cauterization according to what we said earlier, and the cauterization on the vein, and on each corner;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	When the patient suffers pain and trembles, if they have paralysis and muscular weakness, make a cauterization as I said to the one who has spinal and collarbone pain, at the tip of the spine and collar, and let the cauterization be olive-colored according to the way I described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient's hair is long, then I make a subtle fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	If due to melancholy the superfluities or moisture-corrupted and swollen parts are large, then the fire cautery should be applied to parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the descending superfluity is melancholic, and the patient's moisture-corrupted body is weak, then he should drink something according to what the brain is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After removing the shoulder;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making a well-made slice, as I circled it, if you put it in your mouth.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And the shoulder if it twists, and hold it firmly with all parts.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying the ointment, and it is good to rub with old honey.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And if the burn is too hot, then it can be endured.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After the circle is cleared by dents, and it is left to cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this once a week with another government bone, as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see it burned, then make points all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cauterization makes the head wetter.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then put on soft cotton in a burr and grease with linen grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hair comes first as eyebrows by the signs I mentioned earlier, then start and drink the mash thing cleaning the head, and all the moisture, and I made it soak more times in the morning.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he has shaved his head, and I perform the cauterization on his head, and I cauterize on both temples, where the two eyes are assembled, or if one eye is separated, I do it in that one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut all the veins and arteries that are exposed and are long according to the size of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and prepare for dislocation of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then it is not as bad as you think.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery as you would it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never do you cauterize or harm the two bones of the lower part.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and used and are on the veins, or disfigured the arteries that appear to be small in the appearance.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	You see that it is excessive cold, and therefore I made the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of the descent of the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the head, and you cauterize on the two temples, and you cauterize where the hair grows to remove the bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if it is too rough, then the cauterization is sharp on the scalp at every small cauterization;
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A great flood of tears through the dens of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore he should drink mare's milk three times a day;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the surgeon makes an incision, and I perform a cauterization or olive oil cautery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And I perform a cauterization called "clavilis" on the two horns, a little more than the cheeks.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And close the artery that you did not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, therefore cauterize with this olive oil cauterization.
de coi ci est li forme:	1. "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that I perform cauterizations on the horns as well as the hooves are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let me leave my hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The first line translates to: "Long hair that does not touch the ground.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never has it happened that the hair of the oils is converted into horn, and prick the oil, and I make a cauterization according to the following ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This is about fire, or ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even.
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are grown and even, then place the patient in your hands.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After drawing a line on the skin of the eyes, make sure it is as long as the patient's eye and include the beginnings of the eyelashes.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then apply a soft wax in the oil of beeswax and musk, then wash off the fire cautery with the form you have created.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing the part that you have injured a few times, make sure the edges are clean.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise at the point of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then gently press with your hand, and leave for three days, then put fine cotton on the wound as long as the pain is intense.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the ointment treatment, when it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same part as you have done before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hair is burned as much as the paper is lifted to its natural hair, and is even, and it does not prick the hair with the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hair grow as long and even as possible, then make a piece of cloth in the shape of the mirror's edge.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and live chalk, of each one a .З., and mix them well together.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And then I make it very well, if it does not cool down, then spread it according to the shape you made with the mirror's edge, and put it on the paper of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the disease stays in one place only, if it must be overlain in one, and they are merged into one.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put on the cotton soaked in oil in the corner of the urethra;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the head of the patient is in your hand and you show the dose with the medicine, and press the poop and the mouth as often as the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it feels like burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine does not help you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the burning has passed, if you lift the leg of the awl, and then see if the paper is raised as it was raised by contraction of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	If it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then apply more medicine to the joint or if the medicine has not taken effect, as long as your joints are even and your limbs are steady.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put soft cloth on the wound as long as the edges are red, after cleaning the joint with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other similar ones, until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	If you have the skill to properly tend to your wound, with great care so that it does not lack in medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hair touches it, then continue applying the medicine to that joint that has become softened by the paper, in the same way as you have done before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cure when it is healthy;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and it is the form of the humorous dough:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And since the men's hair is different in size and thickness, according to your instructions;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not make it wrong the right way to that which is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work well, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Command the patient to put his head in your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and touch the members of his head between your hands in a way that it does not move and does not move his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put cotton into the eye of oak or into the juice of persillon on the oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	After heating the cauterization which is divided:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is twisted at the head if it forms like a hook of windlass, gather the wire so that it be the cauterization.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, if it is pointed at the head to one and another, and if you see, if it is as a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but this which is twisted is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula it will be flattened, and in the gristle, and it is dried.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and it is closed if the hand, and the gristle becomes the belly.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After placing the hot iron, and hold your hand on the iron at the edge where it meets the oil, so your hands do not burn.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the iron in the oil grease, and it will become corrupted.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the fire cautery on the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then relight the iron again, and if you manage to do it, and let it cool for three hours.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After that, put cotton on the wound and apply a drying ointment as soon as it is clean, and let it pass ten days without it being clean, if you apply an acidic corrosive medicine as soon as the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And so he follows what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterization of fistulas that no of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand the fistula, and then the knee;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Afterward, put in the fenestra, and there is a subtle change in this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make it to the quantity of an .Z. of plunk;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firmly on the fenestra, and do not move the patient at all, until the plunk is firmly set in its place;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the oil with soft cotton wool in the corner of the eye or in the eyelid;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The plunk if it is art to the knee of the fistula, and the health of the saffron is saved;
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer physick to the umbilicus, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is appropriate for the patient's own belly.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks in the lips are called "cracks" and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in divisions, and the cure does not help, then use a small fire cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And he puts it in those cavities as soon as they arrive.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the wound so that it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the groin
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When abscess comes from the root of the gall or in the uterus, or from the teeth, after taking and lying down and it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore, you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the bore or puncture of the fistula, and hold your hand until the wound is closed from the inside, and if it bleeds.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And I make once or twice, after we have cured what we have said in the cures, as long as it is healthy.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if it is cured once or twice, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, then you must expose the bone and expose the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first line of the translated text is "For the fire
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the thighs are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and it does not work, then put the head of the male patient in your mouth.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After shaving the cauterant whose form came here in this way, as you put a collar around the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And he puts the fire cautery on the wound, and holds his hand so tightly that the patient feels pain coming from the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After gently releasing your hand and continuing the fire cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the patient's mouth with salty water and scrubbing their teeth for an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part, if the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is dried out.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain in the teeth comes due to cold, or it is cold, or visible, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary to know how to perform the fire cautery in two ways.
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and fire cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Fire cautery, if they are such that you burn wool, and the end in a iron or copper cup.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a pin, and building a flame with wool, and then placing the tooth on it gently and holding it until it cools down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And I often do so until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are burning, and place the tooth on it, and then put a piece of iron as hot as possible at the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The first line of the text translates to: "If the fire cauterization is such that it burns several hairs of iron or gold, and it is large so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cauterization, if it forms a certain way, and places it on the tooth, and holds your hand until the cauterization is cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, as the pain will be less for you or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with hot butter in the pressure of this cauterization, and then it becomes red.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	It is the form of the fire cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery as you wish, according to what you have;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	It is the form of the needle:
des scrophules	The first sentence to translate is "des scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are soft and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, therefore wash the fire cautery blade after coming to its form, and it has openings for the smoke to issue from the other side;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the fire cautery on the abscess once, or it will be most effective, until it reaches the source of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the swelling is slight, then use cauterization according to the amount of swelling, and leave it for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And moisten the cotton with wool as much as necessary until it is saturated.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the limb of scars and wounds as much as possible when it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the collar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture enters the cold channels and at the same time when the complexion is cold, it is necessary that the patient be first treated with soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After I made another burn at the other joint of the spine's head, and that is called the "clavicle" by us;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure the limb as we have said until it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the whole
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all diseases of the shoulder are cold and moist, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, I make the burns on the parts you wish.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another burn at the hip between the thighs.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and that is called the "clavicle" according to the form that was said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	If you see, make cauterization by pricking all over the cauterization that is called "points" of which the form is here before in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and be the points just above the earhole, or on the outside.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the limb according to what is mentioned earlier, and let the cauterization be at three points according to this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for this reason, the fire cautery is lighter, because you make it three times a day.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After you have sewn up the patient's back and chest.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	after loosening the knot that is dependent on the titillation, you must loosen it with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated due to moisture, rinse the cauterization that has II nerves of the ear, which is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the knot as it pierces the chest, and the wound of the cauterization will come together in four cauterizations.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	For this is why fire cautery is made with a cautery that has three needles, because the appearance of cauterization is six cauterizations.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	2. And never has it been adjusted to this point because it has eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After you put on the cautery with the needle points covered with silk:
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After making the patient rest, and do not let the limbs be long until they are well comforted:
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated, something comes out quickly, therefore a cautery is made on the thick part of the cautery clamp, or rather, the point where cauterization is pricked.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the pain is eased.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come to the stomach, and they are drawn out of it as soon as possible, and the purges are given to it, and according to customary cures, but it does not improve, then it is necessary that the patient's back be soaked with water, and his legs and hands are extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	For this, after the third cautery, I cut off the clavicle at the place where the amount of one is equal to the number of cauteries, and I divide the costals as much as the appearance of the cauteries is at three angles, and there should be space between them so that they do not become united as they grow;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And may the cautery be used if they touch the two parts of the ear, and the figure of the cautery should be according to this form and not be too large or small.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large cautery being used on the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And the one who fears this cautery, should be cauterized by touching and pressing on the stomach and not according to the quantity you see in the chest;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then the cautery is completely applied to the cautery called "points";
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	And for the liver, there is pain from dysentery and moisture and large complexity due to excess of natural complexion;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	The patient should be treated according to what we have said in divisions, and if it does not benefit him, then the shoulder may become inflamed due to its own reaction.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	Signs of encephalitis are recognized in this form and shape of cauterization, and according to the quantity applied to the liver, the epidural space is affected, or the head comes out.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And there is a gap between each cauterization and the growth of a tooth.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And let the cauterization be long enough for the whole body, and do not press your hand on it throughout the cauterization.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let only the half of the wound be exposed, and the patient should be on his side.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	If it cannot be done, then make it as wide as possible, and ease the breasts.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to do this, then when cauterizing these hot cauteries, be subtle and gentle in the art, and make sure you do not burn the whole body, because you will dry out all the flesh.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And may it not rise again to the bowels, because the flesh is very subtle and can be seen anywhere.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When it has gone into the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or the cloth.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is in the char, he feels great pain but not too much.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if he is in the toile, he may feel sudden pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this cure of the eyes does not work, it comes to pass that the patient's head is swollen.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then open the shoulder or the abscess, and then heat the cauterization that is similar to the wound, according to which it is formed:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize as much as the skin is burned, and it will be very painful, until the wound is healed.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of the bones as much as it is healthy.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And no means can be found for this burn but for those who have studied medicine for a long time, and through these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it is not possible to overcome it, and I believe it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Therefore, it is not possible to overcome it, and I believe it is better
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make of burns with roots of Aristolochia, and in the same way:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of Aristolochia, the longest you can find, and it should be dry, and as large and long as your two fingers:
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and make it into oil, and heat it, and cauterize it between the force and the col, and two small burns in descending in the part which is dry like the beard:
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And the second cauterization is between the fifth rib and the seventh, at the back of a small pit.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And the first cauterization is on the thigh, and the other on the stomach, and between the second spines, and the two hips defend the cauterization that is between the spines;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press with your hand, but make it open widely as you smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And no ancient says that no man uses fire cauterization like the rasor, and they cut it and put it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the incision.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	When there is pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	However, in this case, there is no pain or death for the patient, or fistula that cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cauterization that you should know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	However, there is a way if you make III or IV cauteries, according to the length of the hairs, according to the figure of the cauterization of the liver that we have mentioned before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient be on his side or on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cauterization if you have two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and soften the bone where the hairs are, or the pain of the patient comes from the side, and let the elevations that you soften on the bone according to the bone, according to the length of the chest, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the chest.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After the fire cautery has been applied for two hours, and the burning sensation is felt on the other side, then take the cautery, and it will cause pain in four places.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, if you cauterize the entire fire cautery at three needles.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when the patient has developed phlegm due to long tension, and it is necessary that the other treatments beforehand be said.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "de ydropisie
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not for dropsy, but in the way that is called "ascites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the bowels, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two at the back of the spine, and one at the end of the penis;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cauterization be well near the edge of the ear.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After the cauterization, let the patient lie down with their hair wet, and do not delay the treatment of the patient after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And the healing will be faster, and the two intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cauterization is on the abdomen, it is the clavicle that we have before to show it.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And on the back, it is olive-colored, according to what is placed in front of it.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the wrapping of the arrows
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are wrinkled and are like amber, and they are flat, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the ear and the anus.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And gently place your hand with the cauterization so as not to return.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in front, otherwise it may be too rough for the awl, and let the fire cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After, make two cauterizations on each leg at the sharp point of the nail.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the longer cauterization be on the outside of the thigh, in front, and the other on the inside of the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizations long enough to cure, as they are in their place.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the cure of the other cures that we have spoken of.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vitamins and digestive substances that are in the stomach and intestines are affected and cannot be cured by usual methods,
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	When you see the patient in great pain and with great courage, if they have had a cauterization on the stomach according to what they have spoken of before or a cauterization on the stomach, the cauterization circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four cauterizations are made on the anus at all the fine cauterization wires, and two cauterizations are made on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then perform the cauterization on the point, and the cauterization on each side, and the punctures in the stomach, for the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of the hemorrhages
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the embolisms are either formed or formed at the base, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist humors that are corrupted, and they are treated as we have described in divisions, and there is no benefit if a cauterization is made:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	In the third line, they suspend the spine of the other side, which is completely bare and unevenly cut, and then perform the fire cautery on the buttock twice.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cold and the meat is not cooked, and the face starts to bulge, then the face on which the fire cautery was performed as previously mentioned, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cautery clavicle.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the fire cautery long enough.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the wound is healed, it will be healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnosite which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the wound, if the fire cautery appears to be too sharp, then put it completely on fire and then place it all burning on the wound.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and it leaves so much of your hand that the cauterization does not reach the birth of the vein, because it is not cut.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if it does not come out, then cauterize each time as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of wounds, using them as much as they are healthy.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cauterization on the skin, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	A wound that has not been properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure tightness or opening, we will tell you about it in their own words, if they come to a serious illness that cannot be cured by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and gushes pus and corrupt moisture, if you provide total care to the wound, and keep the patient aware of the entire wound as much as possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After rinsing the cauterization that seems to be a rasor, and remove it through the fistula according to the amount that tries and is entered, and resume the cauterization as long as the corset is porris and corrupted, once, or twice, depending on the amount of the tumor.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And take care of the wounds of the nerves that are injured, and the large wounds.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula is at the course of the uterus and the intestine, and you treat these wounds, and do not use any other means than leeches, and think that it is not serious, then.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treating the wound until it is healthy, and if the wound is clean, and the materials are long and strong, then you can be sure that the wound is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not long and strong, it is certain that the wound is not healed, and the bone at the end is affected.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And as for one of these that we will tell in his arm.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain in the head comes on, and large ventosity, and no woman can bear it, then it is necessary that you cauterize him on both sides of the head with the cautery clavicle that we have mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize him in the environment, then there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will give more aid.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is full and weak from headache and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then you should cauterize on the part opposite the bladder, where the hair grows at the opening, both on the left and right sides, and each one should be cauterized like a penis.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And you make the fire cautery on the back, or it will give you pain.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And the cautery stick should be made according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow for the formation of semen, and the flowers are rotten and their ends delayed.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, it causes great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Therefore, it is necessary to cut the third cauterization through the belly, as we have said or cutting from the bladder, and it causes pain on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And the cautery stick should be made according to what we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hedgehog
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the moisture-like substances descend to the handle of the axe, and for this reason if it remains motionless in its sheath, then the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and if it is found that the thigh is in the wrong department, then you must cauterize the patient's shoulder on the axe handle in the manner of a circle, and hold the shoulder before the axe as it turns, so that the axe is outside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it is done in such a way that it resembles the cauterization of the stomach;
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if such cauterization is not present, then make three olive-sized cauterizations on the patient's thigh, and let them be as similar as possible to all the others;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	for the pain of the shoulder
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the shoulder bone, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is treated as we have described in the division, and the treatment is not effective, and the disease is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	therefore it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors with fetid pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After I have done the cauterization;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the way to cauterize is done in two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	it is necessary to know how to assemble burning drugs and cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	If the fire cautery is performed in various ways, some of them are like this:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	If you cauterize the horse's hoof, do it in this way: third, make a triangular cauterization according to this form, and have good depth and breadth, and leave between each cauterization the size of a thumb, and it will be olive-colored;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never has it been done to cauterize on the neck of the horse's hoof, because there are four ways according to this form;
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if you cauterize at the circle we mentioned before in the displacement of the horse's hoof;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But I make it in such a way that the circles contain all the hair, and all the sharp points are cut.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the buttock and does not reach the thigh or the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And when it comes to the thigh and leg, if the pain is severe as the surgeon says, I cauterize there at the ankle, IV times, on the left side, a small piece.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And if it is the cauterizing kind, and the sharp points are many.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the surgeon feels that the pain extends to two or more points or near the enquiry, then he should cauterize at the point where he feels the pain, either three or four in the cauterization which is called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is skilled, then I will do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is from the groin to the thigh, then it should be cauterized with a cauterizing iron or a circular cauterizing instrument. And you should take good care of all your cauterizations so that you do not cause further harm and damage to the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause more pain and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen more cases where cautery was done on the ankle, and they hurt so much that the entire leg became inflamed, and the toe as well, and it was noticed and corrupted in all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of belly which he lost his life.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts assembled, make a fire cautery on both sides according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the thigh, whether it is this way or that, I will do it in such a way and so large as to be as big as some nail's head or a smaller one, and it should be intertwined and interwoven, and should be spaced out and spaced apart, according to the quantity of a new nail's head.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and be between the intercostal muscles of the second part, and also like bones, and if it has a good piece of iron.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And wash it as much as it is red and gritty, and then put it on the mallet of the malaise hail, and be twisted around the sharp chest.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the cauterization is once the cautery is made and left for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a plaster of burr, and leave the wound open long ten.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cauterization due to its harshness, and few people use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and all that is harsh cauterization, which can be endured, and later it does not matter.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	If the ardent cauterization is that you make and an instrument with interlocks in the corner of the door, and it is either of iron or of steel, and in the high part has us, and between each the quantity of the growth of a tooth.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be overwhelmed and connected, and they are joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the handle of the axe on the patient's shoulder, which is firmly grasped, and pressing your hand firmly against the handle of the axe.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After heating the hot water in the pot and leaving it for an hour, the patient suffers from the pain and inflammation of the wound.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it also has the effect of burning as if by fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the mordication has passed, take your hand with the instrument and gently lift the handle of the axe, leaving it for three days, and then cover it with as much as the black part of the eschar is healed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And let it remain for three days without food or drink;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and that would be the assistance from the side after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that burns according to what you have done in the shoulder.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the way of the hot iron, and I have written or treated about the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, mix them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or there is a small hole that can be pointed with a razor and entered.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place on it another and better one, and place some alkaline and salt and soft ash on it, until you have made as many powders as you will have in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And he leaves it as is until the water comes down with the ague and chill, then takes all of this water, and mixes it with chalk and alkaline soap as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And when it will be in the heat and is maintained in the mouth of medicines and in cauteries of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes the work like fire, and if other medicines are used well, such as burning the heel with honey and anacardic acid and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galiens tells us of a remedy by which some were cured of the pain in the thigh and sciatica, and he said that no other remedy was needed, and that it was cured in one time after this remedy, and he was bathed as he instructs afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And then in this way that you prescribe green leaves with fresh and dry verdure, and the mouth is greased with a little fat, and it is placed on the heel, the thigh, and the leg where the pain is, and it is tied.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	When left alone for three hours, the patient no longer feels the pain.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then I make him enter a bath as long as the chest is raised, and then I let him enter a cold bath, and the pain will all leave and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And you advise that no one should use such cauterizing medicines after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	Dyascorides says that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat's hair, it helps to relieve the pain.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And it should be made in a particular way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the mustard and beat it with oil, and put it in the hole that is between the thumb and the other which is called the fossil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After drying the goat hair, and burning it until it is charred, and then putting it on the hair, and leaving it as long as it remains stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And repeat the process again, and continue doing it as long as you feel by touch that it is returning to its place, and that the pain is ceasing.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And these methods of cauterization are called "goat's cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back of the neck
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back of the neck, whether from scratching or percussion or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, rather it is for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After the patient is free from drugs or other substances, and they are lying on their back, if the pain persists, three lines of incisions should be made, and in each line, cauterize or more according to the will and ability of the patient.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And it should be done with the cauterization according to the one called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the clavicle mole according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often affects many children, and the signs of the beginning are that they strangle when they start to grow, and cry.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you push on the back of the spine and on the appearance that comes with the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it heal, if the cauterization is done on the cauterizing tool according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization becomes brown in every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the end of the spine with the cauterizing tool touching the second or third line and they are points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb to the extent that it is healthy according to what we have said, and you are warned that you will not perform a fire cauterization on the gilbositeit which is in the spame of the nerf.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in the joints due to moisture is expanded to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold cause and remedies by medicines do not cure it, it is cured by cauterization in a certain way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the cut of cauterization at the end of the joint, and the olive-oil cauterization in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If he thinks that you prick at the cheek, then he orders a burn to be performed on the entire area claimed as "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	When the pain comes to the knee and other joints, and this happens often, I would cauterize on each knee three times or four times on each part, using olive oil.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you have more skill, but do not hold your hand for as long as it takes to see the effect,
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	If the pain descends to the jaw and back, then he administers the cauterization we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pain is in the hands, then make points every two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there is no more pain, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pain comes to the wrists or spines, then cauterize each part and give the patient government to the midwife and medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make the patient govern with medicines and purge the blood, then they will be cured by God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture comes in writhings, and the bones descend as strings, and it is novel, if it happens that when you see to cure it, it does not lose its juice;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that it uses things that relieve the stomach, if it descends from its stomach;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After the wound is placed on your back between your hands, and he commands that you shave your hair until it is smooth, and cuts it with your nails, and signs of healing appear on the bone point, and there are signs that resemble half of a circle at the corners of the corners;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then rinse the cauterization with the form that is here, which is his shape;
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and has a glistening feel.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the buns on their legs;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and he shaves his hand on what it does not return;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and works well on the thighs of the patient, and puts the ointment and the salve on the thighs, and the other on the place where he shaves the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cauterization at the sign with all your hand, and hold it right and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the first time, then continue again as soon as you touch the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be gentle with yourself so that the bile does not rise when you do the cauterization.
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die, or other wounds.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know when you come to the bone at the cauterization, your efforts are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be done gently according to the size of the part, and also for adults, according to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, cure the leg of the patient as much as possible until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the treatment of other wounds as much as possible until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 14 days on the side where the wound is painful.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his nails be long, so that the feces do not stick when he goes to the bathroom in private rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 14 days, when he wants to get up, make him wear a well-made girdle, and every other day.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and take plenty of rest, work hard and do not drink too much beer and wine, and do not snore too much.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when this teaching is made, it is entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When routs (hernias) come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, the fire cautery is applied again according to its quantity, and it should be done in three places.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the treatment according to what we have said.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And no of the ancients have said that it should be done at the fire cautery at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	1. The shoulder rises and I make a line for the width of the fracture, and another for the defense, and hold the patient's hand at all the cauterization point.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	2. But the first cauterizations are more gentle and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	3. there is no pain in any limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	4. When pain comes in any limb, whether from cold or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the point called "points", and to cauterize according to the length of the limb, its thickness, its weakness, its location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is healthy for the first fire cautery, that is well.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If this is the case, continue with another fire cautery on it, for custom is that one must die in the member that is proximate, because it comes to the fire cauteries as long as the pain is healthy.
de meselerie	of medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The remedies are never helpful once through cauterization, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you see the cauterization, prepare yourself if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and do not hesitate or lose hope, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, therefore I perform the cauterization on the head of the chief:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I emme the head of the chief, and the other towards the front at the end of the cuts:
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and it touches the two horns, and it behind the hump:
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and so much of your hand that the cauterization lives on the bone, and so much that the pus comes out forcefully, as if the vapors of the large humors can come out:
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and the cauterization is done on mice according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the burning is everywhere sparse.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if the burning is manifested, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these burns that we have mentioned or chief, and I cauterize in one go, and II cauterizes on the point of the shoulder, and VI cauterizes on the point of the back, and I grant on the croupe and I other delves, and II sus the II espaules;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and II sus the wrists and II sus the tendons of the foot, and I suspend each joint of the hands and feet, and II suspend the fissures of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and remove the bones that are underneath the heel, which you do not burn.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never made a fire cautery on the bone, and the other on the stomach, and the other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And be careful, the more you make a fire cautery, the more help it provides, and it profits you.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And be careful, the patient does not feel pain in the fire cautery if it is done correctly, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be both large and small according to the parts and joints of the body, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the dough with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is safe.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When the wound is healed in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then I make a fire cautery on the member according to its size and thinness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization be a small amount entered into the flesh.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of wounds as soon as it is safe.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And no time is it made to cauterize and at the hand and on the thigh and on the back, after the issue of the bone that makes the member motionless, and if it is not removed from the flesh.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and nothing else enters if it is not known of the members and the issues of the moving bones in the body.
de albaras	of scars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is aroused, and the art of medicine finds nothing, therefore cauterize with a small amount of caustic on the flesh, according to the quantity of the flesh, as long as the member is motionless and has its color.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then the treatment of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and of colic and wind, of each a part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix all together, and bind with a cloth, and apply to the shoulder as often as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by burning
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When syphilis appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the burning is done with a fire cautery that seems to form a circle, it should go around the entire syphilis.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And everyone says that you make a fire cautery at the gum of syphilis.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And everyone says that this does not seem right, because I doubt that it is ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to do this once.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the most correct thing is that they are burned outwards, at the cautery called "circular", as we have said in our mouth about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The first sentence to translate is "de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer". The translation of this line into English is
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays to die either by the excess it does or by the old age of the patient who is too weak (that is, too many) and has little blood, or by the tension.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hurting to die.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	However, the cautery is done by pricking with thorns.
aprés le laisse ensi.	after it is left alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will struggle to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it perishing at all the cauterization, if you heat the cauterization of this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has perceived the heat, and such are the cauterizations that the patient feels deflated in a certain way that the course of the pulse is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, if it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cauterization by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing more than a swelling of the limbs, as it also dries out the hands like the feet.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the joint that can suffer from fire cautery, then sharpen the thorns to prick small and large, according to what is suitable for the joint or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After the cauterization of all parts as much as you remove all corruption, nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted will not ossify.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it rest for three days, and apply oil to the burned parts as long as the blisters from the hot fire are still intact and all corruption has subsided.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the care of the burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy children are born, that's good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then resume the cauterization where there is need for more corrupt legs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this malady has never been cured by medical treatment in the place of the fire cauterization.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said the cure of the ague disease in the division.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take the amount you have at your disposal.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the porings that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it has happened that the feet were affected by a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing to be done which hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	1. And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	2. It is to know that cauterization by fire and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	If you are scalding, then the scald is like a pen made of hot iron, and it should be made as large as possible so that all parts can be covered, and there should be subtle margins.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After you put the scald on all parts of the joint, turn your hand completely around the joint until it reaches the end of the joint.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And it will remain for three days until it begins to excrete sweat.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of boiled wheat and leave it on all night, and the joint will become painful and will be desrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment by applying it as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	If they are converted through deflection of the heart, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then you must have a hot iron cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a nail or iron bar, or a feather quill, and put it on the joint and the tendon, which is to know how to remove corns.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the nail on so that it burns all around, then put a bit of hot wax, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn until the margin of the nail reaches the root of the screw, and then find the hot iron way perfectly fitting near the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	The patient suffers from the pain of a bee sting for a little while.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then it will leave him alone, and it will die at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	1. I make another after that, as long as you are aware of all these that are in the course, then you cure the wounds that engorge blood.
li cure dou trembler	2. And you cure those that tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from cold, or fever, or another, if it comes that you must apply four cauteries or four on the back of the spine, one cauterization between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And you apply an iron cauterization or a pearl cauterization, and at the stomach with the olive cauterization.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If you let it tremble, and it will recover its health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	4. Of pustules that have burst.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	None of the time appear by defuers the corps baths, or pustules come from large materials corrupted.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If it is necessary at the first when they appear that a fire cautery is made on each pustule's head:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery of mithra's coal, or if the point is seized by fire, or of the cautery of Aristotle's root, or at the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never is the cautery made at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and it cannot grow new wounds forward, but it is disordered by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is tied off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there have been great dislocations of blood from the artery that is covered by the wound that comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the fire cautery of the member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a great grief to cleanse.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And all that when there is none, if you have to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press as much as it can until the pain is calmed by your index finger, and no more blood comes out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put olive oil cauterys of various sizes that are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then I proceed, according to the size of the wound and the strength of the limb, and I route the cautery along the artery, and place the cautery on this vein or where you hold your thumb, and hold the cautery until it is no longer painful.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it hurts when you tie the vein with your other hand after the cautery, and the cautery is extinguished, then take immediately another cautery that is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And continue to do this one after another until it is not painful.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and make sure you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes to the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and be sure that when you do not cut the artery, it is not possible to cause pain immediately if the artery is large, as this can only be done by one of the four methods we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	If by cauterization or extraction it is not treated immediately, or by tightening the thread, or by medicines placed on it that cause pain, then
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	then it should be tied and extracted.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will perform the restoration of the tie very tightly with threads or to put things burning on, or other similar things, will not benefit from it if not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to no one and there is no medicine present, then you should place your index finger on the wound as we have said, and firmly press until it is painful in the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the patient, but the cold water is often too cold that it makes the wound cold and swells and causes pain.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make up questions before those that have to do with what he knows about cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate: "ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	Our first chapter of medical treatises mentioned that for all diseases, if it is necessary to burn or use hot medicines, we must know the causes, effects, forms, and types of cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have written this chapter of cauteries for the head and neck, and I will enter this chapter through my own path because it is lighter to write about this than about other parts.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	2. And if I begin this, it is necessary, my dear, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	When there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you are foolishly doing this.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many methods of people come in the treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If there are those who have become ill with such a disease that they died lightly by the force of the remedy they took for their disease and the greatness of their malice.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And this is cause for fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And those who say to you, 
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am hungry.
et li maladie est despitouse.	And the disease is untreatable.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is only by your consent that those who come to you who have this manner can be treated, but put more trust in your honor than in your covenant, and do not give in completely but wisely of what you are certain, and what you could have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prophecy and indication in the care of your patients, so that health may be converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this good reputation, fame, and memory will help you.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear friends, our Lords give you good understanding and right judgment, and if you will seek the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or if you have ordered this chapter by consulting physicians, according to what is done by physicians who practice cauterization, which I have advised for the chief joints, because you will find it more easily that which you will use.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The chief joint full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Sages, this disease often affects infants in the womb, and when the head is pulled too hard on the child's chin.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and never has it been caused by anything that could not be found out.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all those I have seen, it has always led to death.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And because it seems to me that I should make a chapter in part of the treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I see the child of whom the head was swollen with fever, and the chief grew larger each day until he could no longer bear it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and thought so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled between the bone of the shoulder and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the ointment is such that the moisture is between the shoulder and the bone, and the abscess is small, so you should give the patient a wide slice of the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and so long as the swelling corrects itself.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And here is the form of the spatulum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	2. If the fever is more severe and the abscess is larger, then I will make cross-shaped cuts according to this form.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	When the moisture is drying out the bone, and you see the signs of the corners of the cheek being pulled tight by each part, and the sudden jump is what you feel when you press your hand on the bone, and it is not a lie to say so.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If you want to sell the cheek III wares according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	Then after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After pulling out the wrinkles and powders, and mix in wine and oil, and let it sit for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then take the dressing and apply it to the wound with needles and pins, and let the cheek be evenly pressed, and then mix in dry, moisture-free meat with the surgeon as much as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is to look or open the large end of the abscess, and assemble the angle.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for no time has it been in front.
aucune fois derrier;	never behind.
aucune fois en destre;	never to the right.
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Measure accordingly the size of the abscess opening and the angle of the wedge, and they are made according to what you have at your disposal.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and make sure you do not cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and come quickly to relieve pain, if the patient dies from dehydration and evacuation of blood.
de reume	of relume.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is any disease called "catarrh" in the ear or nostril, and the disease is ancient, and the cure by medicine does not help much, therefore it should be treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes closed, that the patient makes a fist.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the thigh with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull the patient's hand up along the entire cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at whether the vein bends, and the two are responded to after the ears, and they are not the same.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the veins with a sharp needle, then cut one and the other with a needle of II parts, as far as the size comes to the bone, and that is by the widest part of the fist.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, cut the cloth away from the artery and press on it with the needle, while cutting as much as possible, like II does to the bone.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is punctured, if the blood does not stop continuing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open with feeling, then it is necessary to measure the amount of spice for three doses, and then add and make it juicy to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and if it is necessary to give six doses of blood, and by chance more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the wound is still attached to the bone, and the bandage that was applied does not come off, then tighten the wound and hold it in place, and the cure of antiseptic as long as it remains healthy.
de emigrainne	Of the migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the migraine comes, and the forehead is pounding, with pain in the temples and headache, and sometimes other symptoms, it is treated with medicinal cures and all remedies do not help, if we cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them if the patient makes the hair on his temples fall, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly responded to rather than in any men who are too faint.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is responded to, then tightly grabs the neck of the patient from different directions, then rubs the face with a rough cloth, and wets the face with hot water until the artery opens clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then lightly scorch the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and take off as many threads as there are from each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	When the artery is subtle, if it reaches the tip of the nose, then the loop of that part follows according to the number of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then it will not jump out without pain at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out five pints of blood, about three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then draw out the blood in two pints of a double strong silk thread, so that no poison comes before the wound, and it comes out with the blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then tie off the excess that is between the two lines in that hour, and then, if you see, if it cauterizes as much as the bone, until the heads are tied.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And it is the patient's turn, if the helper does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the fire cautery helps to end the moisture.
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because it is of greater help than moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the limb with many layers of soft cotton and ties it well made.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when one loosens it, if one uses dry medicines that make the wound clean and tight, and tents as long as it is safe.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if there is no artery cort without your work, if you hurry too much through the cauterization, or you use your hand with vitrol and tighten it until it is stained.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	If you do not have this present, then put your hand on the leg as much as it can be, and make it cold with water as much as possible, and hold it tightly as it can be.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	What is more dangerous and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cautery, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer on the wound.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the stomach is too empty, it retains less food.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two cuts a large amount of spices, and then when you see the two legs filling up, hold the fire in your hand as long as it stays on the bone, and cover the vein with the two legs.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let them be far apart between the two heads, for it is not easy to do this cauterization all at once.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the hairs are descending into veins that are soon to become dry and hot from fire, and there is no benefit from medicine, and you see the patient's face swelling up, and it feels like the limb is moving, and it seems like a convulsion;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And the wounds are thin and moist, so that the hair of the paper is cut, and the papers are torn, and burned by the heat of the tears, if it is necessary for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And it was called the ancient "bruised cure," and that you should cut the patient's hair according to the disease, either at the front or the back, then I made three cuts or the back equally according to the length of the back.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and it should be one of the cuts like the other two, which I made at the front by advancing the scissors, and the others I made with the paper as a guide, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are made with the paper.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound should have three to the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and make a piece of sponge and moisten with cloths the sore, then cut the sponge into pieces of two parts each, and this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision that is made in the temple just before the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scar all the tissue that is between the two furrows throughout the entire facial skin that is under the bone, then make another piece of sponge just after the other second incision, and then remove this sponge.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	2. If the bone is broken in the first fence with the instrument called "cultellary," and it is very sharp on one side and very blunt on the other, do not be too sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	3. And cut the costelet along the bone to the knee, and the costelet is blunt towards the bone, and the bone as far as it reaches the second fence.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the veins that descend from the head as soon as the incision is continued until it opens the curtain, and then make another piece of sponge just after the other second furrow, and then remove this sponge.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	Then the pain is alleviated, and the patient expresses the limb for the pain taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then, in each fold, a piece of soft cloth is placed, and dampened sheets of linen and oil and vinegar are placed on top, and it is ensured that the patient does not get cold.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And at the third day, the linen is removed, and a large amount of watery mustard is applied, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other ointments that are used to treat wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	The first line of the text translates to "He takes away the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	If any blood clots come, you will see the hairs thin and brittle, the eyes waver, and the papers burn.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	When the hair grows, and if it causes pain, and the patient suffers;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	and you advise them of these accidents that these matters and this catharsis do not come from many veins, and the remedy which is in it if it is;
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut along the front of his head, and another wide one in the middle.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the fending of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be close to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with the mingeir;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out onto an sponge, and then press between the two lips of the fending and put a piece of cotton on it, and tie it with lin;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then apply some softened wax mixed with oil, and keep it away from the fire.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is cold, if you rub the bone until it becomes rough and begins to crack, then the treatment of things that cause inflammation, which are like nails, is necessary.
En teil maniere:	In this way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of collogene, and make a paste.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And apply it to these wounds to cause inflammation for all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the ear's chill
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that is done to the ears is one of the four things.
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	Or grains, or beast, or mine piercing, or similar thing if it can be made like this.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	If you sow, like thistles, fires, and pits;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	If water flows, like hot and inflamed, and similar things;
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When he pushes something into the ear hole or another way of thing that does not fit well in the ear, and it does not grow in the ear, if he puts the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the wound, if no drop of blue oil or oil of sinew is distilled, then the extraction is made;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and I make the patient hold their breath, and it stupefies the nostrils as they exhale, and put on the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and keep the ear at a distance;
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times comes out fire through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out, make the extraction with fine tweezers, and its form is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If she jumps with force using her hands, it is good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If she does not, then she should perform an extraction from the subclavian gland with small difficulty.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if she does not jump by this, then I make a hole in the arm and cut off the end of the ear or the opening of the ear, and stop it which is inside the ear wax if it can enter with the hole.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the tail is formed because often comes so as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if she does not come in this way, then he takes glue of the dog and takes the bones, and puts any instrument that is not for this purpose, and puts a piece of cotton inside.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the gluteal muscle through the incision or whatever it may be, and draw out further.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out of all these things that we have said, then do not hesitate to tear the ear off rather than cause an abscess and spasm.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of tearing if you do it first with the shoulder joint, and remove as much blood as possible according to its strength, then place the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear towards you, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or depending on it;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and so the burn is like a moon, as you approach the piercing, then the bone follows your pain, and the blood flows heavily in your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grainy and begins to ooze, then apply the extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot be squeezed, then apply the following treatment according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and give an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not make this mistake when you think the grain is moist from the ear's moisture, as long as you have made many pieces of it;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then use your fine tweezers and the sugar, as we have said, if the extractions are healing;
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the fever therefore that happens in the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the condiement of the first essence and makes the ear ample with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them be placed on the same ear or where the wound is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for that reason, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If it does not, then if you take many piers according to the length of your arm, and wash them in hot water, they will become lighter.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and then put the helper on one ear, and pull out from it its other parts, and carefully through another hole in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and continue to do this piercing over and over again until the pain subsides completely, and then it will be all better.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	If you see, if you take one joint and burn the other end of it as hot as possible until the pain increases, then it will be better.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then I made another incision as much as it needed, until it was all out, as we have said in the wound.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the removal of the fetus, if it is small in size, like a pea and similar things, cure as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large in size, it can be felt, by using forceps for the extraction.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and that is the thing that is easier to open in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the removal of the earwax from the ears, if you open it as we have said in the division and treat with distillations, but the cure does not work, if you look at the ear with the sun, it will work.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If he does not open it at all, if the needles are subtle, and if he does not notice, if he takes the rope of copper as it is formed:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight and wide and long.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And cut off the more subtle head of the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient has, then they will form the rope completely.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until you see it all.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey, then soak the rope of cotton as I have said in the hole.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not become sharp as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the decision of the verses, and you will find them or treat them with distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	If you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, then the form will be as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let silver or gold threads be inserted into the small holes, and then they should be distilled.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press the distillation with the well-made silver instrument, and if you see the raizer and envelope around the tip of the cotton,
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then your oil or juice will gush out, and whatever you see of your medicines in the canal, the canal should be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then pour the oil from the raizer all over the cotton, and press your hand together until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And it feels the pain of the patient, and it is the distillations that are given, and they are poured into the ear at any time, as they are distilled in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And keep it from being too cold, as the medicine would not work if it were not bone-cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the ear's chill
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without having purulent otitis in both ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And this same thing happens as a result of swelling of the wound, or of the ear drum being torn, and these swellings never go away in the ear, if one cannot see.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And never has too much fluid been given, and it is seen that it is not good.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	The one that comes from the font is, if it cannot be seen, a sign of successful healing in other situations, and in this case, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and observe:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the apparent inflammation, if it has healed completely, then this is the form of it:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And so, and turning and bending before and after, if it does not hurt the ear:
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the inflammation is around or at the edge of the ear, if you hold it with thin tweezers and a light grip, as long as it is not too tight:
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the exfoliation is in the ear, if I take a soft and light raser and scrape it slightly and heat it up a little, then I put it or cors of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the ointment that the patient hears is bitter, gently pierce, and keep your fingers away from the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place a tent according to the large piercing of the ear, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do not use any ointment until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and apply pink ointment and powdered vitrol broiet.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see swelling in the ear, if it covers that you pull the tent and rub a smooth tent made of rose oil and wax, as long as the swelling is red.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure, as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. If the dislocation occurs, then dip a sponge and wring it out with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the dislocation which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the parchment's folds
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is the cure that comes in paper from hairs when they are wet and dry, if you extend them with needles and tweezers, and the cope of a spatulum of its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then put the head vitriol broiet.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it is not decorted, then the fire cautery subtle lenticulaire is applied, and the cauterizer after the incision must be moistened.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And they are often repaired, but nothing dulls its roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the grit
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times, things come in papers from the hairs that seem crooked in their form and hardness, and for this it is this disease called "granular" and is an assembly of large moisture in the paper of these and soaking.
li ovraiges est telz:	The dissection is such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	The granular is such that it is silent on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make the wound larger, then lightly burn each part, then take it with forceps and the cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not burn it with feeling a little paper, if it does not hurt the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	When the dislocation is large, if it is assembled with a stitch, and the care is given as soon as it is healthy.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If it is small, if no force is applied, because the repairs will be slow and unnatural.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	If the dislocation descends towards the ear, if you turn it inside out, and the dislocation is held with tweezers, and the cuff presses from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	If the paper is moved by the incision, it does not hurt anything.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	When the dislocation is cupped, if you lift the salty oil, and care for the leg as much as possible until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is woven into the sheets of papers used, and this happens more as children grow older, and it grieves their eyes, and they come to the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears are in their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because they lie down in their wet beds and sleep, and the papers of their cradles are soaked with the grease that envelops them and have the appearance of having been affected by the exinach that is open to the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand on your two and feel exinach in your eyes.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the chapter is such that the surgeon places his head in your hand.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	Then take a piece of thread, and make a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, and then put it on.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands on both sides, so that the exirnach is assembled in the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then place the moisture in the spatumile and cut a fendure that is as wide as the wound you make in the healthy part of the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the thread as long as you can reach the exirnach.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in other arrangements, exirnach comes from the fendure, according to the shape of a piece of greasy wax.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	1. Pull the thread all around your two legs, and turn your left and right hand as much as it is possible until it is apart.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	2. And make sure you do not cut in the tendon, that you do not go to all the muscle until it is, and that you do not wound it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	3. And if the thread does not open at the beginning of the cut, then lightly open a little part of the cut until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	4. Then pull the thread as we have said, then soften the threads with oil and water, and put it on the leg, and draw it well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who bruise their sails and put on to corrupt the moisture which is dried up.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor when he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the leu, then the doctor should use incisions that are gentle when he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on paper that is not of its nature, and it is watched, if it harms the eyes, and brings forth methods of diseases as common tears and softening of papers and albugines, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the cure is according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by fire cauterization, or by medicine according to what is in front of the cauterization or chapel, and it is made or by incision and stitching or by needles, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your left hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your right hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If she is converted, it is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, then insert an awl into all the holes.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	And make the edge of the paper or the hair grow from these hairs, and pull the thread through all the paper, and turn it to the other side.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then, in the other part of the paper, adjust the hair so that it is even with all the nails, from the large to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then pull the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and drape on the paper, then sew a figure on the paper as you would with a needle, and if it is not equal to the quantity you see being lifted by the paper that is supposed to be drawn, then it will be correct.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if a part that has skill cuts much paper according to the quality of the paper, whether it is soft or not.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then do all the sentences you have signed in the second line, and start with large, sharp scars.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And it is one of the fissures near the natural hairs as they grow in size, then cut the root, then scrape the bone at one of the two corners, then scrape it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then assemble the two lips at a stitch with a needle of one thread for all the fine hair, and remove the blood, and dry the excess hair on the nails at any glands you see, if you see this done.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	If this is not treated, then leave the stitching and threads for three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound with dried things that are constricting, as the paper relaxes from the wound's moisture and assembly, but the stitching is too tight (as they say in old times), and it is uncomfortable.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you recognize the paper as a figure that is also like the force of fire, as we have told, at three incisions, follow the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes he who overcomes with equal strength according to the form as it is now:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take an awl or if it has one thread, and make the figure fit.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And cut another piece of thread as large as the largest needle, and then a smaller one, and sew them together evenly between your two threads.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then gently press your hand evenly, and gently press all the leather where you have made a cut, as we have experienced, then sew the two sides of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And when the abscess comes to your incision, if the pain and swelling are alleviated by creams and compresses.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And never has it happened that the hair of the paper is converted.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If you follow what we have said about the incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	The sutures on both sides are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The patient is treated for bites if they follow this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And if you convert the paper and make it according to what I said, then make the bites by hand, and tie them as securely as the paper and the length of the staple is.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And cut as you hold the pieces, where you hold the threads.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then assemble the two subtly, following what is underneath the paper oil, and draw the bites from the two parts formed.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And it leaves no wounds, and the leather that is stretched will become thin, hard, and wrinkled, as long as it is on it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if the wound has strong forces, then the care until it is healthy.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted, and no more hair will be tied.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And it is the form of the second incision you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The veins are such that you need a fine needle, and I cut a thread of silk and thin.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then assemble the heads and soak the other slightly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order in the chase the other thread of silk briefly, and note the chief of the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's thread in your hand.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And if you can see the sun, then cut and decline the hair, for these are subtle and thin hairs, then pull out all the hair in one go at the root of the hair that is not yet gray, and trace it on the paper as you pull out the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the end of the chase, and pull out the hair in the chase, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then, pull your hand as soon as the hair grows to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the hair is treated and the hair does not grow with it, then you will cut off the hair at the end of the thread as you have ordered, until the hair grows and you see it by the sight of the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	However, if you cut off the hair and the thread, and close the oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the wound appears.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is short, then accompany the long hair of the cheeks with the one you left, until it is elongated and then lie down.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oily substance
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the food comes in the oil, if it comes in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	1. naturally, and 2. unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes through wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of the wound is that you cut it, and clean the edges, and put on bandages of linen, and keep it until it is healthy.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And only that you use in the treatment of the wound things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, then the disease becomes worse than the first.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but it works on things that soften, like figs.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the head of the wound or gash and its seed is cooked, and the ointments are melted into no oil at all, and wrapped in a tent, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And your treasures are if you keep guard that it does not become wet according to the form it was before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and the cases we have said no one has been worse than the remedies of this disease, that it does not relapse according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the charge that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is truly called "acarati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wound and burn and cauterization and things similar.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the path of the dislocation is that if you prick with a needle, if it has double the thickness, and the thread in the char, and I feel the other side of the larmier as much as the first, so that the threads come in II chiés of the char.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the char is at the end of all the needle, and the cap is wide in the saturate.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if it seems like on paper it returns according to what it should, that's good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, then take the razor and put it in the fender, and turn the paper, and make II fendures or cost the paper as much as it needs.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And may the heads of the two bones at the two ends of the incision be set in place, and may they be shaped so that when they are assembled, it will resemble the figure of a letter that does not have "I griesche".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then, that char, according to the amount of its cost, which is greater than the paper, then adjust the two uneven parts, and the cost of a linen thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, for the cures we have mentioned for mollifying medicines and tents, as long as they are healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or a wound or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a flat cut of the hair of the paper according to what is before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then describe between the two shoulders of a tent, as I said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And you must make the incision according to the shape of the disease, as it varies in shape, and the skilled masters can adjust everything to return it to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient himself, according to what is needed for the incision and excision in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	I would shave off the paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this suture is made by women in a certain way that the paper of it is soaked with white oil, and cannot move or make its natural cuts, then it is necessary that you touch the end of a razor with the wet paper, and hold it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and the stitches are removed as long as you cover what is inserted in the subcutaneous layer, which is not too thick nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the subcutaneous layer too much nor has the oil leaked out.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and make sure your incision, which you scrape of the one assembled, lightly, so that the paper re-forms according to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it becomes healthy all that assembled, and never in the oil salty water, and raise it with sweet water, and with warmth.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil smooth hair in a lot of glue.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And afterwards, after the third day, use a warm poultice and things that are damp until it is healthy again.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the finger of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways to cut the nail:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and resembles hard sandstone, and another that is not nervous but resembles dry moisture frozen, which when touched with fire and cooked with tongs, if it cannot be done;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and the other one resembles towards the great lurker, and grows little by little until it covers all the vision and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the surgeon places his finger in the wound, then he cuts the hairs.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And soften the paper with your hand, then pick up the pincher with a small opening, and hold it at the end.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or sheephair, or beaverhair, and a strong thread.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	Then double the point of the needle with your finger, and pull the thread through the needle, and perforate all the needle, and tie it with one thread and hold it at the end, and scrape off all the hair from the edge of the needle that touches the prunele and the silk at the tip of the chief, then cut off the remaining in the root of the armor as subtle as possible and as small forces as possible, and leave the natural or alloyed char, so that by the incision does not come the corps of the tears habitually.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and no time has it been set in its place solely, and as for that, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then the scorching, we have all the substance of it, and the form is like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the substance does not touch the chipped tile and break it, and the pruning does not occur.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and then after the incision, a little oil is put into the wound, and dough is made from litargire, and it is left until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of that which is to be done until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the finger is not very nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, this appearance of a finger of medicines is often treated many times.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, if you work the oil of the woman, and take the light spumous substance according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And dip the finger subtly, and if you see that it does not become soft and the reason is pressed, if you distill from your mouth the oil of colchicum made from litargire and red colchicum and seil broiet, and it stupefies the oil to the other part;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then continues the other evacuation according to this same work, as soon as it is all complete.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in the oil, as with an abscess, then the milk, and first treat the abscess as soon as it is healthy, then continue the prick as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is dark in the oil at night due to great pain, and a part is affected but not all, that tears do not come;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then it distills into the oil that is redder, which is made of lividity.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the wood that was carved by the plum tree
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	The hairs of some men never turn red, and they prune them and roll them on papers and turn them into flowers, and seem like a rose of the dragon.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the patient, if the surgeon places his head in your hand, then he manipulates the limbs, and all that is uncomfortable and inconvenient is adjusted to this, and support is given with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then adjust the first knot, and pull everything to the end, and make sure you do not cut the thread at the seam;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the incision be done with a sharp knife that we have mentioned in the incision of the toe, and with slight forces you can open it, if as the chapter shows after this chapter it is demonstrated;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is completed and all the knots are open, if you use oil of silk or distilled red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and apply it with a cotton dipped in urine, so that it is sure to stop bleeding;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	If it does not cause pain, and the flesh surrounds it, and you doubt the healing of the wound, then leave the oil and cure the healing of things that soothe the wound.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work as soon as it is safe, and then make several cuts in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is necessary that you soften the cure of every weak oil of the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental way of work, in the knife of iron.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that your limbs are calm in this work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye and blunt the oil for all time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	The first sentence translates to: "However, the first thing you notice is the oil, in its state, is false, and there is no other disease than the false one.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	However, the treatment is done in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to cut their hair short and even, then let the wounds heal according to their ability, and make the wounds subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be as many as one thousand degrees in one corpse according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then you can reset the wounds subtly, and remove the remaining oil from the wounds as much as possible, until you see the wounds free of oil:
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and make sure you do not weep the oil with the points of the spatula, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be as eager in your work so that you do not miss any stitches.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have finished, if you distill the green and red oil to cool what is left of the bellows.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot distill all of it in that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave some for as long as the pain is soothing and secure from gangrene, then resume according to this method until it is healthy again.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And it is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	It calls "arissati" fistulas:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure with fire cautery and by using hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not completely healed, then it must be opened, and all the moisture that is in it must be drained, as long as the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and darkness, if all the instrument of this thing is in its form,
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and is called "spraying," and it is made of firm wood, and it is cut like a knife if it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the leg of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is set.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this once, then restore the leg with exfoliating medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the leg is swollen and hard, and the belly is also swollen, and it remains so for over XL years, and it does not heal or become infected, and no accidents occur, you should be reassured that it is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, then there is no other way but to bring the fistula back to the affected area according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	When the first dislocation occurs, it is necessary to realign the bone the second time using force and medicines called "agues," and if the patient feels pain according to this form, then the head of the shoulder should be fixed at three angles, and the force applied should be gentle as much as possible, just like you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place the shoulder bone on the arm, and gently pull your hand away from the oil, then turn the entire forearm so that it pierces the bone and feels it through the flesh as if you are holding your hand on your neck;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the dry medicines as I have shown you, and when it is cooked and hardened, if it sticks to the neck, then it is the material for the shoulder;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If there is a lighter thing on the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil's end
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the wound is fully open and there is no sign of obstruction or inflammation in the urine, then you must examine the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then the nurse should perform a urinalysis using a sterile tube, without causing any harm. Then she should mix the urine with equal parts of oil and aloe vera, and incense and sarcolic acid, and then strain the mixture, and apply it to the belts and sheets.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And how the sheets are applied if you have enough sheets, double each one by four, and then place them on top of each other according to the amount that the wound has.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then the strain forms due to the pressure of a hard bandage, and the ventouses resume sucking without feeling pain.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then the ventouses are used and left on the strained part overnight, and if the strings loosen, then you must pull it tighter.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then the string after the day and night, and if you see the oil repaired, it's done.
se ce non;	If not.
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the burn returns and the cloths, the string, and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Great disturbance of the eyeball
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come in the eyelid, then it opens and comes out paper as small as a grain of resin, and it is difficult to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	When you see this, the treatment is such that you insert an awl at the root of the part where the joint is dislocated, then insert another awl or a double-edged knife into the part of the arm that is injured.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	And then, using the first awl according to the position, leave the other awl alone.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then, using the double-edged knife on the other part of the arm, draw out a piece of the urethra well, then remove the awl and place some soft oil on the wound.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And leave it as long as the edges of the urethra heal with the urethra, then treat the oil with things that are comfortable until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	For no time is the wound restrained by any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the hairs have a great appearance, then prick with the subtle spumace that comes from the oil, and remove the moisture and lower the hairs, and enter as soon as possible.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the hair is drawn as soon as it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil's bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" is not more than a bow that is assembled in the oil, resembling sharp descending, and it is not sharp.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of appearance of the wound is that if you choose to sit the patient on the side and straight, then take the head between your two hands, and hold it as long as you see the bone coming to the end of your fingers.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then tighten it, and do not let it descend and make it untangled, and see the patient's things as he alone does.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not descend, be sure it is inflamed, and if the bone comes out of the wound, it is not straight as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you sit the patient on your hands, then take the scalpel subtly and cut along the corneal edge I pot through the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the corneal bulb as long as the bone is in.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When it comes out, if it is distilled in the hot warm oil mixed with honey, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it is treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the cold water
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the appearances of waters in the division, and what must be done to perceive.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if according to the health it is.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you hold the patient between your hands as firmly as possible, being in the light of the sun, and with the healthy and narrow oil.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper of the oil in your left hand where the hairs are sparse, or in your right hand where the hairs are dense.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, the hairs that are longest, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, the hairs that are shortest.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument at the corona through the largest part of the hole in the oil bag at the least painful point of the arm, then use the instrument called "almagda" gently, and pull your hand as much as it pierces the oil bag, and feel that almagda enters the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda hole is at the end of the spice which is just above the prickle of the nail.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and that is the head of the shoulder
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal layer, and then place the instrument just where it is, then press on one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the patient feels faint now, if they see the surgeon in front of them and the instrument before them.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	after resting the small piece, and if the wound re-emerges on the second way, place the forceps with the instrument, and when it is secure and does not move, lightly twist your hand around a little bit.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then place the wound with a piece of gummy thread, and lift some oil from it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then pour the oil into the wound, either coarse or finely ground in oil and a large amount of oil, and mix it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those who are ours, put on cloths with a large amount of oil.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the stone cannot enter the kidney through its hardness, because it has too many sharp hairs, then you must use the instrument called "alberit" which is in this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And only pierce the conjuncture, and do not push too hard, but make a small incision first, then pull out the arrowhead, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the completion of the work, the patient feels pain in the shoulder, if it is dark in the leu.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And perform all movements, eat light foods, and do not move the head to the left or right, and adjust according to his natural position.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then the patient stays in this house for a while, rests his eyes, and then shows me some things, and then he puts on his clothes according to the ninth hour.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	1. and only that you do this in the care or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you align it, because the swelling increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	1. If abscesses occur, you must slide the oil in front of the ninth day, and address the one that relieves the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	1. And when it is calmed, remove the eye and place it in a safe place for any day, and remain there in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	1. And then exit from the house little by little, and adapt to its case.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	1. and be aware that no disciples should undergo this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	A group of people came from the Yrach region, informing us that in some areas it was practiced for centuries, but we have not seen any evidence of this in our land, nor have we ever read about it in ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	By chance, it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	These are the appearances of the forms of cauterization, because those who do not know them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and be of true cauerateur:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	And of the char for the head.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	None are born or become different wounds, but there are some that seem to have scorpion's stings at their edges.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	If it has such things or if there is an enhancement of color from flux, and if the color is good.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of these charms that are good and do not enhance, it is necessary that you hold the shoulder between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and move your nostrils, and wet the onion to those charms, and tear them off.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then continue to hold the spumous substance of a part, until you feel that the char is completely soaked.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there is nothing else left that can be covered, then it is best to cover all the subtle and light substances lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and so as not to overcome you, abscess comes if the wound is like this;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is malignant abscess, if you hasten and cauterize as much as possible without making them too dry and all bones, then grease or ointment or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it does not work, and moisture comes suddenly, signs that it is healthy.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not pierce as it should, signs that it is healthy. If the bone is not crushed, and the string does not come out to cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then you must cut the end of the linen thread a little thick, and it should be strong enough for our hands, and it must be between each nail or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And place the patient's head on the pillow so that it does not move, and support it with a damp cloth as much as possible, and cover it with a cold cloth as it comes out of the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And many times they make the child cry in school, and it is a light thing for him who sees it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the forehead that comes from the pillow with one hand, and the other forehead that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and wipe it after the other in order to clean it as we do with our hands.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as long as you see that the child's diaper has become soiled, then take off the diaper, clean the child, and apply Egyptian ointment to the child, and put it back on the pillow in the same way.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	I will perform this operation on at least three or more areas, as long as the incisions do not corrode any further areas of the char.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then I will insert or leave a needle in any uncut areas as long as it is safe, and if it is necessary to use medicinal herbs, then do so.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as we distill the oils and medicines or needles.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be made of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a needle, and it is led in the same way.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see, if I make a needle closed, and it is the plains that are used to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and hold the head of the shoulder to keep it steady when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	And of the char for the head.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times the head of the shoulder is not a disease called "telul", and it grows and becomes large, until it is seen as something to be looked at.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And that's why you need to cut it at the beginning, and then put the oste on fire, and then use the cauterization or burning medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay it as much as it is large, then if it is hard, of a dark color, and poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if you do not cut it with iron because it is an enchanted wound, because if you cut it once, there is always great pain for the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the patient is in pain, not due to shock but from actual harm, you can see that it can be controlled if the surgeon is skilled and takes care not to cause further harm, and cure the limb of things that are loose and restrained.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the joint is cut and bruised
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long, and is only in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, it is necessary to consider this when there is no other option, if you look at whether the wound is fresh at all times with its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then stitch the lips together with a stitch, and treat them as soon as they are healthy.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already split on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all the parts of them as they heal, and then stitch the lips together with a stitch, and pull them, and sprinkle them with dragon's blood powder, and anoint with incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling subsides, place a piece of plaster or another ointment plaster on the affected area, and leave it until it is dry, then apply the ointment when it is dry.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of sewing if you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	Or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal sewing;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	Or by thread, as I have told you;
des apostemes des levres	2. of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In the hands of skilled surgeons, the lips of abscesses are often hard and look like grains of sand, and they can be larger or smaller;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore, you must turn the lips of the abscesses, and cut them on each side, and take them out with tweezers and close each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then use the hand after incising the blisters, as long as they are not inflamed.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then wash the hand, and cure the hand with dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the thigh bone
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times, on the old cheeks, which they call "alabaster";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	if you must hold it with your nails, and the cord at its root, and let go of the bow or the wound.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put on the hand blisters, or other restricting and drying powders.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that cheek returns after the incision, and many times comes back, if the cord second time, and cauterize:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If there is no return after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the strums by copper.
des sordens	of soreness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	No times are assembled at the head of the teeth, the teeth are inserted between the lips, gums that are ugly and sharp.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And no time is the black and yellow tooth, until corruption comes to the lip, and it becomes the tooth.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If it comes to your notice that you must hold the patient between your hands, and the head is in your holy place, and you pull out the teeth or gums visible, as long as it does not cost anything.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and I make of black and green, and of yellow and other stains, as much as they are needed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one has this at the first reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then repeat the second part and the third, as long as you have everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and you should know that the teeth have the ability to take on various forms of wisdom teeth, according to what the one who demonstrates it does, because the raspers used to remove teeth have other shapes than those used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the patient's tooth pain that you postpone it as much as possible and as long as you can, because it should not be done quickly.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a substance high in moisture, therefore there is no excuse to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is forced to take medicine, then you must be sure of the tooth's pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain of the patient's tooth has passed, and make sure it is not damaged, and treat the root of the tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and the patient will not return to pain until the tooth is extracted, as long as it is not extracted, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	When you are sure that the tooth is decaying, if it comes to removing the entire tooth, scrape it thoroughly with a sharp tool to protect the gum of all parts.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then the mouse has its way with you or it pricks you slightly at first and then firmly, until they are well set, then it affirms the nails.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the shoulder of the patient be between your hands, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After the tooth is extracted sensibly with forceps, and if it does not slip, then take none of these strings and pull lightly on each part, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the den is perceived and mangled, then you must fill it with cloths, either the wounds are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if the extraction is made subtly with nails, so that it does not break in the extraction.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it is wise to over the thigh to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be very careful not to break the tooth, and there will remain a part, and it will return to the patient due to the malice of the root and greater pain in the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And make sure that you do not make mistakes like those that the ignorant healers make, who through their haste and their recklessness never break a bone, and do not injure it except for what we have counted.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring it about never once by the pressure of that great disease, either by the roots which they press, or by the bone which they break, as we often want.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the gum is dry, wash the part with wine or vinegar and soap.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And if they become inflamed and are lost, which often happens, use the powder of green glass.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	If this does not work, then the patient should have the fire cautery.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the wisdom teeth, if they do not protrude at first, are long and thick, and will not double in size until you pull the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be thick members if they do not break when ground, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be teeth that can be held tightly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root of the tooth is pulled, if you can put it in the socket for one or two hours, until it is smooth, then the tines called "alveoli" will be loosened, and the gums will look like they are well-groomed;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And these are the forms:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out of all these thorns, then it comes that you pull out the whole branch at the root, and put in the instrument called "athali", which is known as a "palinch", and its shape is like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And so be it, and let it be large if it does not break through, and if its root jumps by this, it is well.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If that does not happen, then help from all the stimulants and the shapes will come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use it with two rains, then the shape is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in the reason of the teeth, and with this instrument which seems like great thorns, whose shape is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let the stimulants be large enough that it cannot break, and may have a strong smell of stimulants:
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and other stimulants, which are not small:
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the master tools are used by themselves, according to what their uses and the disease they demonstrate, because there are many diseases or the ancients did not teach different instruments for the diversity of bones and the horseshoe does not break at the end or other bones, or it pours out, if you seek as stimulants that I have said, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-held by holding the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and rest.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the body to the appropriate medicines, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears to not fit according to the natural body, and its form is misshapen, and at the same time in women with multiple teeth, if it comes out after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and it cannot be soaked or softened:
adonques lou raie;	then the root.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	If it is bitten by a tooth, then use this instrument whose form is like the small tooth, and it should be made of iron, not sharp:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And quickly and quickly in the hands, for the hardness of the teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears like this, then you can tie it with a part of the rope as this is formed:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is used as the claw of the fish we make for the eagles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in the claw of the tooth, it is very lightly held in the hands, so that it does not move until it falls;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the end is flat for any rasping, and if the teeth are too sharp and they cut the tongue, then it is necessary to smooth the file as much as possible, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth rot
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth in front of the gum, or by percussion or by listening, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you treat them with restraining medicines, and it does not help.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	If they are restrained with a gold thread, because the silver threads turn green and blister, but the gold does not move.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and that the silver threads are neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see the teeth erupting, then take the thread and pull double between the two healthy teeth, then put the threads between the crooked teeth, as long as you see progress in the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then continues the covering just where you left off, and gently and wisely draw back your hand, so it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and keep your finger at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then fit the crowns onto the pins, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth and the one that is being fixed, and make sure it does not touch the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it as wide as possible, and if it does not hold, or the pins come out, then use another pin.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it does not hold and serves its purpose, and is the shape of the teeth and the placement of the two healthy second molars and the two third molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is set, if it is put back in its place, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and does not move a single hair that is not sharp and painful, and never takes the form of a bone of a sheep, and it is put back in its place or where it belongs, and it is tightened as we have said, and holds firmly, and remains so as we have described.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of the copper wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never has a case been seen where the tongue or its flesh comes out, which is not known.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by chance of wounding;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and put their head in your mouth, and hold the tongue gently.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then pull the nervous and large ligament as far as possible, until the tongue is free from its place, and if it does not return or out, and that is a serious wound, if it bites the uncinate and pulls wide the nearby ligament;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and make sure the tooth does not cut too deeply, because the artery that is there is very small;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have finished, if the lip is red and swollen, or cold, then place the tongue in a cloth tent;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and the salve should be applied to the patient's lips every night, so that the wound can heal;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if the dislocation occurs, then place the arm in a splint.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if it does not heal, then use a slow-healing cauterization on the cauterization, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then apply another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see that the wound is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel pain, if it does not hurt, because it is a gangrene.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if the patient is declining into chlorosis and there is moisture, if it gushes blood, and they apply a subtle sponge, and they extract from one part and another;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if you do not want to harm your patient, then use hot iron wires as soon as they are burned, and then return to your work as soon as you have finished everything.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the leg of silk and thread, and treat other treatments as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	gums of the chin
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No time comes when the gums called "godath" are called "godath," and they are properly called "hamanders." When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, then keep them.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is a small, hard aphthous ulcer of dark color, and you do not touch it with any iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, and not touched with iron at all, then for the evacuation of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But let it remain until it is dead, and therefore you will leave it, or it will break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is watery-colored and the root is fine, and you have prepared the instrument well, but first see if the abscess pus is reduced and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then place the patient in front of the sun, and their head should be in your hand, and they open their mouth and grip the tongue between their hands, and press the tongue against all the instruments, as you will see the form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Et soit d'argent ou d'arain subtil aussi comme uns coutelz:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Cant tu press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the aposteme, if take the pin and the hook in the amber, and the tail will be further than you please.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And try nothing with the threads, then the crown of the instrument, of which it seems some forces are.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And the head is all sharp, and one place to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you have needles, then the form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And it is cutting from one side and the other, and named.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	When you have grasped one of the hamstrings, if you grasp the other in the same manner, and after incising it with a hot, sharp knife, and cutting along the tendon, and if blood comes out, if the tendon is seared, or gallstones are cooked, or stones from the gallbladder are removed, and similar things, as long as it is not infected.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the treatment continues as long as it is healthy.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And never do other abscesses appear in the throat than the two hamstrings, if they are cut out like the two hamstrings.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the mouth, which is to say the abscess is of small sensation.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had I closed almost all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the clogged duct, and could not drink or eat, and died if she lingered for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so large that it required two incisions through the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore had to perform a tracheotomy, then the patient became worse, and there was a large portion of bowel exposed.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then another part was removed from the other side of the neck, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After filing the gallstone in these abscesses, and cutting off a part, and it does not become larger than a drop of blood.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and the woman's guide was torn from her mouth, and began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop trimming this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess dislocated further, and filled the joint I had opened, as much as it could hold, without causing great pain.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore, I operated on it and burned the joint of the jaw:
ensi demora sens croistre;	and it did not grow further.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I will begin from these parts, and I alone shall do this for you, God willing.
de l’uve	Of the urethra
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the finger is pulled towards the nail, and it is long and thin, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is too thin and round, it is called "nail".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When the wound is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not benefit, you will see that the incision is calmed and it is subtle, so you can cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And the one that is round and assembled and is not long.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And if it is bloody or colored or black, you must throw away the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is therefore necessary, as you see, according to the method I have said, of the belly and length, that you set the patient facing the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we have made memorable before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then cut the gallbladder in the urethra, and the tail off, and the cover it with the two incisions I mentioned in the incision of the two amandras.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is over the natural termination.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cover more, you will grieve to the voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	After the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two thumbs, and treat it as soon as it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient suffers from pain in the other side, then you should use an engine for the fire cautery of the other side.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is sharp when it is hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And the patient places his head on your shoulder, and then presses the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the cauterization chapter of this book, and confines it with live coals, if it is not too thick or too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and by using the thickness of this instrument, the form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And if the head has a hair or puts in the medicine, like the hairs of a comb, and places the instrument on all the medicine under the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient is gasping at their cost, if the saliva and foam come from the medicine given, if it does not descend to the throat and jaw,
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the vein, the amount of the one hour's worth of medicine, as long as you see it is clear and the medicine's bitterness is soothing.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around no instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and dip the instrument in all the cotton in the case, as long as the cotton is damp at the vein.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And I do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then it leaves it to dry, and I wait four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have experience in re-cauterizing medical wounds, if it is necessary to do so again, and after the cauterization, wrap the end of the urethra with rags, and clean what is outside of the medical wound.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have a sore throat, and use gargles as needed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, only the cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take a lamp, and put in it incense, oak leaves, rosemary, chamomile, and any other herbs you have, and assemble them all or none of them into one pot, and let it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And it can be well glued with strong earth, and it has an instrument made according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it can be of silver or gold, and some of the ends are inserted in the mouth of the patient as much as possible until the vapor rises through the canal, until the canal is hardened;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the wound has often healed, until the canal is dry and keep in mind that you should not do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, because many things come afterwards;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and only do this when the onset of the abscess has occurred;
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a catheter and put it in the patient's mouth, if the mouth is too dry.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the catheter of urine does not burn the mouth, and it is a good cure together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it has happened in the throat of the gargle or spine of fish, or nothing at all.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore, if you must try what you see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And if it does not open you, then you must make the patient vomit, unless the meat is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	If by chance the thing is accomplished through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a sponge piece, or a navel piece, or a lactice root, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and holds the sponge by the end and then glues it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches the shoulder, if it will, and then draws forth a string;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, then use the instrument of plucking according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the hooks be placed at the head if it can more gently enter into the mouth, and have the head raised above;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And you must not touch the epigastrium, for all will avoid it, and do not force the bones.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is best that the patient forces the instrument, because they know what to do.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the force is applied correctly, or it is pulled evenly on all the instrument, until it is fully applied.
de la sansue de la gorge	2. of the throat's gaping
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No time is there for medicine without the hands, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when that does not help, look at the patient's face in the sun, then press the patient's tongue to the instrument I have given you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the bone, if it has all been cut with a sharp knife, or if there are small thorns that are worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	If it is not worth anything, then take a small hair, and pull it out of the patient's throat, then pull or cut off the hair with fire, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's throat is covered with sweat all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then fill me with cold water, and operate on the mouth, and the throat feels as if it is being swallowed, and it moves often with my hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the tongue feels the cold water, then it is.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not feel as we have said, if the patient smokes tobacco, with the instrument I mentioned in the uvea fumigation;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, because it will feel ticklish.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the fumigation if you press on it whether you can or if it has charcoal inside, and it is covered with a covering sheet in the environment, and in that place is the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then the fumigation drips on you, and the patient places the head of the chain in their mouth, closes their mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but goes to the wound.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the wound hurts, and if it does not stop, then the fumigation is repeated many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And the patient suffers from thirst, and drinks salty and acidic things, and does not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And therefore it is necessary to follow this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it can be seen, resembles stingray spines that can enter the mouth.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it seems like the beak of a surgeon, and it has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot hold.
et vez ci la forme:	and then its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The cauteries of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	The forms of similitudes of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes after each other in this book, and they are diverse in piercing and size.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And it is in two ways that one is itself in its similitude, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if by the bones or if they are in place.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the head of the tumor is different from that of the foundation, and the head of the tumor in the flesh is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if in abscesses we do not have to pierce much, as long as the bowel is dead according to its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	If it happens that they believe they can perceive when they are not, and do not die according to their accomplishment, as if they were amputations of joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when the tumor comes from delightful joints, and it is left as long as it is raw, by chance if the ligament and nerve are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	If the amputation is of the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until the member is dead, it will harm the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	If it is of the foundation, then if you do not kill it immediately, it will be harmed.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is only necessary to perforate the amputation believed to be accomplished with digestion, as if the principal member were harmed, that it would not be cut off, and it would be long-lasting, and a fistula would be formed.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And cannot be cured in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you observe the opening of the aperture caused by the abscess, which is inflamed according to its completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the fever subsides, and the alleviation of pain and burning, and the debate and agony of the inflammation of the abscess, and the other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary that you cut around the aperture of the abscess, and where it has opened.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And if the opening is long and thin, and the abscess is in the hands or fingers, or in the joints and arteries, and throughout these areas without any clotting.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those places, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the body, if it is necessary to leave the puncture until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you do not love this beforehand, when the blood comes from him, and it is painful to defecate;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and make them more like him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if no abscess is found according to the size of the corse, according to what the member can endure.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you cut out the small abscesses, the large abscesses.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if in such abscesses or it is necessary to cut out the head, and close it.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When I have become as hard as cheese, and is dry, then it is necessary to make it like the bubbles.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	If it is of those that are cut at three angles, and if it is of those that are coped as the flint of fire, like the throats of the angers.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And if it is of those that one makes a round cut, and other sizes and appearances are coped.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, like superficial wounds that require you to cut it plainly.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the wound is large, and it has hooked great bowels, and you cut it, if you do not pull out all the bowels at once, but pull out a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then the wound stupifies and jumps to the other side, then you pull nothing else.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	1. Do this many times with great effort until the bow is entirely broken.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	2. If the patient's willpower is weak, whether due to women, young girls, or old age, they will not be able to endure great pain.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	2. If you have never seen the end of the bowel, and by chance the patient dies, you will not know it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	3. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and if you have discovered your abscess, if the wound is small, look at how small the abscess wound is.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	4. And if it is a plain size, then use linen or cotton threads to tie it tightly.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	5. And if there are large abscesses and they have ruptured, then tie each one with a thread so that one does not touch the other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have managed to remove a part of the hide, and it is well-groomed, then it is recommended that you fill the gap with expensive fabric or rough linen thread, and sew it tightly.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, the bone, and the treatment of scarring as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	When the dislocation occurs in your shoulder, if it is cold and wet, and there is much pain, and you should gently move the limb, and put it back in its place many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the patient persists in bleeding, and is under proper care and treatment, and the powders I mentioned in my hands are found in this book, and if it is not enough, then you should use warm compresses and dampened cloths with wine and olive oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in this way, and the patient's condition worsens, so that you must use drapes that are moistened with water and oil, or wine and oil vinegar, just as we have said, then...
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove the suture and the wound, if necessary, as soon as it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is necessary to understand in all treatments of sutures:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or have I said anything about going before the treatment of sutures and this chapter?
des soros	of blood
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the head comes to abscesses, and they are like us, as if it were a grapevine, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	It is thick and tough or it has moisture as well as flesh;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And if there are those who are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt that the patient will not bleed, then it does not matter.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the cutting if you are skilled with all the instruments called "enterostomy", whether the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make it longer by using certain methods.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when moisture is visible, if it does not cause pain to shave the hair that contains the moisture, then it will move back as soon as it is left alone.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, use vinegar and salt, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and keep the part that is more painful at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then resume the cloth, as before, on the second day, and the wound, as long as you see that it does not hurt much at night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment as convenient, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds fat, if it follows this form, it will be long.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And if you gnaw your bones, and scrape off all parts, and apply all your care to draw out the pus or it will.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery is made against you, as I said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	2. And if the dislocation is severe, I will cut and treat it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	3. And the cutting of the dislocation is made on the severe part, if it is more flexible, because there is not much blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	If there is no moisture in any of these incisions or wounds, and these were made by an old woman or myself;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the incision to be similar to a sharp, rough, and bloody piercing, which could not be cut;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if we had not made any, we would have made a wound similar to a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other incisions coming or made, let those that come from the children and roots of the ears be opened as far as possible at the dependent part of the ear, to relieve the pain.
et les cure si com il covient.	and they cure as they can.
des scrophules	The first sentence to translate is "des scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often, the abscess comes to the collarbone, and loosen the clamps, and the wounds, and never once do they come from another part or cut, and they are mutilated, and are misaligned with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And every scrofula is properly located on its side, as the wound and abscess of the chief are, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the appearances of these scrofulas are numerous.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are those that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that which you see in good position at the wound, and is similar in color to the color of the heart, and is uniform in every part and is not like nerves of the arm or the conduit, and is not like a tumor;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if you can cover it with plasters, and scorch it in every part, and the lips of the knee as the knuckles, if you have mastery of it, as we have said in abscesses of the chief;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	1. And the patient should rest and rest, and be sure not to damage the nerve or vein, and not to stretch too much, as the hands may swell, and not look too early, as you may damage what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	2. And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol or some powders that adhere to the wound in the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	3. and let it stay until the inflammation is pacified, and the wound is softened, and it begins to fall off.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	4. And if the uncircumcised part is swollen, then return to your own chapter as soon as you have completed it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then if you see a few small pimples on your index finger, such as nails and thumb.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if the pimple has a deep root, then you must only cut out that pimple with a strong double thread, but do not pull it; it will cause no harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then use the wound of fine cotton, then apply Egyptian ointment, and the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, if you manage to gather the two lips of the wound, and hold them now, then there will be no excess as the wound is not too large.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and to treat it further, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those pimples that are superfluous, pierce them or let them heal;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce them like the one mentioned earlier, depending on the size, then apply ointments and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is being corrupted.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well healed, if the cure of cauterization is done correctly, then it will be healthy.
de squinance	The first line of the text translates to:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke of the size of the throat.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I have never seen such in our world, and it is their scripture according to their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the cut of the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And it is not possible to help with this, because all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those who have the throat swollen in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the ears.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the hollow of the thigh, it is necessary to cover the epigastrium to avoid the destruction that comes from dislocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it in three or four passes, with a small cut that traverses the two circles, or according to the quantity of the cut, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and they say that it is possible to cut the epigastrium when it has no cartilage, and the wounds are long enough;
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the masters are poor, then it is necessary to extend the neck skin to the entire chin, then cut the ear as far as it reaches the chin;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the veins, if you see nothing, and then cut along the line of the facial muscle, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the swelling of the cheek that jumps out due to the fractured bone and by the failure of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leaves the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed and there is doubt of the dislocation, assemble the two lips of the wound as far as possible, and close it all so that you can feel the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medications that make the patient sleepy, until they are asleep.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not know how to do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of blood is noticeable.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Because the shoulder is dislocated due to the patient's weakness, and they cannot move it, and they breathe through the wound, and it should be kept alive.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And because the ancients advised leaving the wound open as long as the disease had not passed, and it had passed in three days or four. Therefore, they ordered to suture and treat the wound as soon as it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I see a maiden who is being cut, and she has a piece of fabric in her throat, and part of her dress is torn.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I was called to cure him, and I found him already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and find the blood that came from it, and I am well that she had not much vein nor led only the gorge, and the blood came from this wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I rushed to his aid, found the wound, and cured it as soon as it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and did not reach the lady's side until she was angry of voice, and returned later to her disposition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I said that in the tailoring of the epigastric muscle there was no pain.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large jaw
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These hernias are called "thoracic hernia" and are large in color like a beefsteak, and are more common in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	and occur in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	The nature of this procedure is to reduce dislocation, which can occur due to accidents.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	However, a natural remedy does not exist for this procedure.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	The accident can occur in two ways: either it is similar to a large wound, or it is similar to an abscess that comes from the artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it is necessary to overcome it, and it can only be done with courage in the small incision, and one must search throughout the introducer.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you also have large hands and cannot do it, then the operation is like cutting our wounds, and if it is done, it must be done throughout its entire course, if there are no problems.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	1. And it pierces completely, and the cure is done as it should be, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	Of the head
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	1. There are many ways of us, of which I will tell all the appearances.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	1. And it is necessary that I die all the difference that is between whelp and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	1. I say that issue is calm and feverish, as long as the ebullitions have passed and is accomplished the porridge;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	1. But the fever and the calmness rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	1. With the newborn there is no calm or fever or pain, and it contains I sweat, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the dove's neck, and becomes thus like a wisp, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	They are classified into two types, either rough or smooth, or wet or dry, and of different colors as I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you first examine and search for the entangled one in all the instruments called "entangler", according to what its form brings or chapter that comes after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	The manner of incising the abscess of the gums is to prick it more with a damp finger than with a dry one, and turn the two points frequently until you feel that the pus has ceased to flow, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the instrument and hold it steady as you force it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the abscess is moist, it is cut according to its color, just as we do with other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And afterwards, if there is no moisture, the head comes out fat, so make it into a cross, and take it with pliers, and gently scrape each part and warm the coat where you should lay it smoothly with the nail.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you do not scrape it smoothly, then lay it in pieces so that nothing comes out.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing comes out, it will return to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it demands a poc, and does not grieve you, then use the wound of some corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and put calming remedies on the swelling, and cure other cures as long as it is healthy.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it is large, if the two lips of the wound are clean, and the care of those who enjoin charge.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the vein is tense or other, and you haste, and use the leather of vitriol glove, and leave it for II or III days, until the wound pours pus, and rest the heat of the sore;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to the copper that is needed most.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See these forms of the entangled stones, and there are three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	Large and moist and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And there are three kinds of stones that are called "alabar" and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Grant, moign, and petit, by encircling the fistules' apostilles.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are like the eyes of the eagles whose beaks are counted, and are of gold or silver or copper, and are more expensive than yellow ones, and are better at avoiding black holes for encircling the fistules' apostilles.
et sont de III manieres:	And they are in three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Great, medium, and small, according to the size of the abscesses.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the tumors are of many appearances, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Great, medium, and small.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	If there are birds with two holes of three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	And if the birds have three beaks, and they are of three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	And if the birds have two beaks, and birds with one beak, and they are of three kinds.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And this is necessary for their neck.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is made so sharp that it can cut through anything, even the skin, because it cannot touch the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And the introits of these are replaced with handgrips, so that the patient does not lose consciousness at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	1. And there are three ways to it:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	2. grand, small, and misplaced, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	3. but only in the shoulder and arm, as with legs and arms, and hands, and fingers, and toes, and in similar parts;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	4. and no other instrument is ever used that resembles forceps, according to this form, but one is inserted in the wound;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And he places it on no occasion in the shoulder that is strong and resistant to wounds and arteries, and it never returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	5. and no other men's hands ever swell when they are trying to correct the wound, as if they were female hands;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	6. and are swollen and inflamed, and those who see them cured think that it is according to this form of this line from .b. to .g.;
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scorch the fat, and employ the wound with medicinal burning char, then stitch the two lips of the wound together, and dress it as it is healing.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if it is crooked, and is made straight by its growth, as it is with women, if they are made in two pieces, by the resemblance of their limbs.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	If one is holding onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, then this line .b. to the line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scorch the leather between the two lips, and remove the fat, and do what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healing.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	If the patient is not healthy, or if the incision is not fully healed, because the therapist does not rest, or due to the reabsorption of blood, it comes that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the dressing and grease have been removed, then treat it when it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is "des apostemes des asselles". The translation of
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These apostles that come out of the hooves are ways for scrofulous hard nodules or callosities to form, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, which contain moisture, must be cut according to this form, along the line .b. and .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels within the abscess are out, if you employ a piece of clean linen, leave it there for another day, then take out all the linen and treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scabs, then it is like we have said in the thorns, and if the wound is deep, then it should be cauterized as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin is sutured as it should be, if there are many hematomas and the vein becomes inflamed and infected.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if the patient complains of pain when it is due to the artery, then it is cut; if there are hematomas, they should be removed.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	And when you feel your pain, if you feel strain.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And if it is due to the vein, if we cut it loose.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to cut this abscess, and at the same time when the screws and nails are removed and the skin is torn and out of place, and it is infected with other pustules.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who has been pierced by arrows made of hair, which have been passed through the skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then, apply the size of the nails, and remove the arrow from the feathers, as soon as it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle, and feel on the other side, and tighten the artery with a thread doubled into two, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then do not insert the bone that is between the two fingers of an introducer as long as it does not cause pain, and if it does cause pain, release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then proceed with the treatment as soon as they are healed.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this wound as it becomes healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is of the size of the vein, then it is necessary to clean it with your hand the amount you have taken from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle into the bone you hold in your hand and feel, and if there is a thread doubled, then take it off the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the suture, as I have said, or one of the two ends of the thread to the corresponding bone.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the threads will not fray, if another needle is used throughout the entire thread from the first needle to the end of the suture at the incision, and the threads are tightened in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then tighten the suture as much as possible, then tighten the excess and leave what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the linen cloth wet with wine and oil, then treat the wounds as needed until it is healthy;
des apostemes des ners	Of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	For abscesses of the nerves come in the artery and vein, they come when the nerves are too tight or due to too much work, and similar things happen.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with assistants and you must do it in all joints, and it is a great pain, and its color seems like the color of a corpse, and it is in more positions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is tightened, it forms, if it feels great pain, and it is not in a state of being dead, but rather it is in a state of being alive;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it is very still in all parts, and it does not go before or after, nor does it come or go, and the one who is in joints cannot be made by force;
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance it may contract.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And the one who is at the head or front, makes the leather at the spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the head is small, then it is held with nails, and the cradle at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, then it spends in the hip, and burns it, then the bone and assembles the wound to the seam, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large pus hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No time comes in the womb and does not affect another part of the body, and it is a disease called "funk" by its appearance, and it affects the root subtly, and the head is large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And in some it is small and in others large.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I have seen one who had it in his belly and another whose belly was more similar to "funks" than anything else, and it had no difference, and they were white, had thin roots, and were trimmed, and decayed due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I found them and discovered in one there were 18 ounces, and in the other 6. The incisions should be made if you observe that the patient's skin is moist, and the color of the artel is bluish-green and moist with a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the patient copes with the spatula large, and they are in your presence, perform the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For the tailor often comes too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not want to, then you must cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient sweating and fearing the incision with fire, then take one finger of well-made thread, and around the artel as we have said, and leave it there.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then comes the restraint, and do not stop straining the thread until it matches the armor, and then feel its strength.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, then it is not painful to the belly, but it does not hurt much, then cauterize so that it does not sprout.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and do not hurt the thigh that is of a foxy color and poor sense and thin milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are infected gums, and I will treat the sore here after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boudoir is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the bile comes from cauterization of a wound or a scar from a razer, and it is under the belly and in some parts of the bile, as it does in other ways, or of sanc which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of ventositeit.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the rupture of the facial nerve and the exit of the bruit, if the color of the aphasia resembles the color of the heart, and it is light and causes pain in various places.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more complex, and when pressed on both sides, it returns, and by chance it may be stretched, and enlarges the opening to the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is light and opens well when you press it with your hand; do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs, the abscess is large and hard, and it oozes in a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to varix, it is wet when you touch it, and the vein or artery appears to be of blood color.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary to leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	When the appearance is from the intestine or the bowels, if it comes that you command the patient to touch his hair, and it is extended all around, then sign to cut through the entire bowel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then he is commanded to cut within your hands, then goes through the limb that you have signed at all the joints, then half of the abscess is removed at the end of the great thigh.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then it is cut through with a strong thread, or with a sturdy cord, and it should be cleaned with a strong alcohol.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then the half of the abscess extended on the thread is worked, and you should indicate your dose, and it will indicate the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you take too much of it, if it leaves, and cause inflammation in the intestines of the stomach.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you take too much dung, if it is taken into the uterus, and cuts off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery is made to go against, or the vein, if it goes in the wrong way, then return to your work and take two hooks, and cut off the two legs that you have done as if you were doing it.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then squeeze the abscess with four fingers on the hooks, and if you see, that the hooks are in the wound, leave the leg as much as it hurts, and the dead man will die by himself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	If you catch it when it is subtle and slippery, then the cure of what must be done, and close the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And draw out the blood or mucus that you see, then treat the shoulder with what covers it, and dry the shoulder.
dou chancre	The translation of "dou chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division that the appearances of a chancre are like this, and we know how to cover it with medicines, and we know how to cure it with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And say the chancre is in the breast, and great caution in its cure, and tell the old man that when chancres are in the shoulder or it can be rated as if a chancre in the mammary glands, and in the nipples, and in appearances like this, and it must be done entirely when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, if you only manage to approach it, for I have never seen a cure.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the overage, when it is in the body or can be opened, as we have said, is that you never cleanse the malady with black cola.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then it becomes healthier if it has manifest fullness, then open the malady and draw out the blood to make the overage.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then your shoulder or chancre becomes soft and all the hair falls out, and the bone of all parts leaves nothing behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and leave the blood as it is, and press hard on the wound in your hand or on anything else, and if they dislocate the blood will be against the incision of the artery or vein, if cauterized as much as they are unstitched.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "de ydropisie
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division that the appearances of dropsy are, and how the assembly of fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only burned.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch iron in these two appearances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanitis and yposarchy, for it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore, when you treat this appearance of ydropsies called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you look at whether the drugs are weak, or if it is another disease than ydropsies, if as all other solutions of the belly and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one does not touch iron, because it is doubtful;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the drug of strong vitality, and it has no other disease than ydropsies alone, and it is not too young or too old, then you should over:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	1. Guide the patient's shoulder correctly in your hands, and gently press the abdomen towards the base of the spine, then take the spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And now, let us proceed to the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	2. And if it does not come out easily, do not force it, as it may enter the intestine when it is removed, and it cannot be pulled out:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	3. Then look to see if the dislocation is towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	4. If it is necessary to remove it from the anus, then straighten it up from the third finger:
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	5. And if the dislocation is due to a disease of the liver, then your finger should be inserted at the left anus:
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is by the muscle, if it is on the right side, and there is no need for the surgeon to cut through the fascia that the superfluities flow into that weak part of the limb.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the leather with the instrument, and the bone, and gently press your hand all along the skin between the leather and the fascia as if you were scraping out a small nail or an entrail.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the fascia as far as the skin does not reach the bone, and it is the angle of the joint that this instrument forms.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a silver needle, and is light or featherweight, and in its part nearest the tip, there is a small pore.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and may cost on another part, three pores.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two other parts, and one more.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is cut like a pen, and its shape is the size of the incision that scribes the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the head of the tool, it is sharp, and when it touches the edge, it now descends with the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	If you see more than it is necessary in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or if he loses consciousness, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But according to the amount of her virtue, and according to what the dispositions of her virtue mean for the maiden, and her will.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then draw the instrument and hold the flame, and it is held now by the heat that stops the pustule that is under the scar, according to what I have spoken, that you must do according to this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then continue the instrument the next day, if you see the maiden suffering from this, and apply a small amount of flame.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this every day, and keep it away from the fire as much as possible, but a little flame.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	If you doubt the patient's condition, and they lack strength, then the care of the cemetery or sandbath is needed, and this can be done by wetting or bathing and in the sun, and it will become flushed.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And the care of desiccating medicines is needed as soon as it is healthy, and cauterization is done on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the abscess, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the end of the bowstring
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is ever born without having a pustule on the bowstring, or if the pustule is small, or it is not present in his leg.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the dislocation is so great that it cannot be perceived with any pin or even a very small needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then insert a small amount of cloth under the incision, and tie it with thread, and leave it for three to four days or five, and if you see urine being made, then close the incision and catch the urine, and then remove it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance, they do not cover, because the urine that comes out is not left closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the pierced spot is small, and if it is treated with a small needle according to what we have said, it will swell.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not know how to tie the knot in their penis are weak, because no child is born with a knot at the top of the thigh, since they cannot urinate before they separate their thigh from above.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot ejaculate because the matter does not come out in a timely manner, and it is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way of the operation is that when the patient lies on his back, the head of the thigh is located like the tip of a penis, if the pertus occurs in the environment, so it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the patient from losing consciousness due to blood loss that often occurs, and if it happens, then treat the wound as soon as possible.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules of the gouge
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often, the abscess comes out in the vein, and it looks like a sore appearance;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and in some cases it is malignant and in others it is not malignant.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	If you want to burn them under the skin, and cut and clean all of them, then put them in fine cotton wool and apply Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of the ointment is done as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the boil is malignant, with a putrid smell and drainage, then you must perform a cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have dislocated the shoulder, and the head of the arm is in a strange position, and it has part of the hair and part of the skin, then you must remove the part that was outside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And if it is swollen, then the cure is to dry it.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you dry it together, if you do not secure the head of the shoulder so that it is not perceived, then blackness and corruption come to the shoulder and around.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you want to heal all that is black and corrupted, then apply honey and flour made from the scars of pumpkin grapes and vines, and then continue with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out of the wound, then follow this form of the moon cauterization:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	1. The fire cautery is useful for these positions:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	2. It is knowledge to know, at the evacuation of blood, and at the corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	3. And if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, then it comes to pass that you bind or lead the shoulder with a cord, and the male releases urine among.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	4. And if the hairs reach the head of the shoulder which is not circumcised, or has been cut or lanced, then it comes to pass that you scrape the head with the instrument, as long as the locks are slippery, and free the shoulder from the verge of all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if this is the case, so that you scrape it with a spatula of no particular value of hair and beard,
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then wash the element between II and I with a fine, cold linen cloth that does not harm.
de la circoncision	The first sentence to translate is "de la circoncision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a continuation of scars like the others.
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	When we perform this work of our will, and properly as with our children, if it is the best work we can do, and the most pleasing to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not call circumcision their children's circumcision because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I want the largest part of masters and doctors who performed circumcisions at the end of the day, with force, and to every woman.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it happens that he has two eyes, and by chance that one is covered, then cover the other one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	If they come back to their place, and there is double pain, and at the mummification, which is not sure, the sharp pain of the limb is not ensured.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and at the mummification of the bone, by chance it chafes the iron, and burns the work, and many times are born without any mummification, and I want it that way.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the circumcision made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces cut both sides equally, either better or worse.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if they fit evenly in one, hold tightly.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the fingers are well stretched out on the leather.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And so the manner of the first wound is, if you think it is a child, that he understands, that you do not force the thread through the verge only, and then I will tie it in all the ways that you please.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then the tie is made between your hands perfectly straight, and return the forces between your hands or to your fingers that the child does not see, nor any of the strings.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then put your hand on the girdle and blow or suck, and pull it up as much as the head of the girdle is in.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then clean well the dirty matter that it is assembled, then tie the head of the limb with a double thread, then tie to the other end.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And you must take it by the second reading from the pouch and the index finger, and press between the two strings, then gently pull the handle upwards and cut the tip of the rope.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then leave the blood flowing a little, as it is, because it is the best.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And sprinkle powder on it and on the powdered fat cooked from a roasted red vinegar, preserved with rose oil and salt, and leave it to dry for another day, and keep the cure until it is cured.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces at the wounding is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The head of the shoulder is dislocated, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of the mutilation is if the wounds escape through the incision.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must extend it to your finger, otherwise, the wound will become infected.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and it is placed correctly, and if you do not hold it with your finger, then the wound will be held with your nails, and then the dressing.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they persist for three days, and the part is swollen and inflamed, if it is left until the swelling subsides, and gently scarifies the area.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If the copper is as you say, and you keep hold of the part of the thorn, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Treat the limb with things made from sand, such as powder, which we have mentioned or treated with powders, and if it does not come off easily, it will be too late; if it does not hurt, it will not matter.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the limb as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	2. Retain urination.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine if it is due to opulation of the urethra, or of the vein, or of the bowel, or of the stomach, or of similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra which is at the junction or neck of the bladder, then it comes that the patient's pain is caused by the urethra being caught on its flesh.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And the penis is placed on the back, and the abdomen is extended from the part above the back, and the patient is restricted as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And therefore the bladder is constrained to express itself at the urethra as if the urine were discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it comes that you administer an extraction of all the instrument called "ringer's solution", and its form is.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let silver be gently plucked out of thin hair, as if it were the quill of an owl.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the tail of a long and half-grown palm tree be gently plucked at the root.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the urine's exit if it is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the root of the hair or cloth, and cut off the end of the thread with the singeing iron.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess of the hair and cut off the end of the tail of the urethra, then anoint the urethra with oil or balsam and urine of onion and olive oil and German tarragon; and make the patient sit on the seat, and the patient's bladder and the verge moisten with oil and olive oil and German tarragon.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently place the ring on the edge, as it reaches the root of the verge, then double the verge in the opposite direction of the bound.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then fasten the ring before pushing it into the vessel, and feel the patient's pain coming from the empty thing, and this is done according to this order because either you will control or it will turn.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then the thread is pulled through all the hair, and the urine follows the hair, then it is removed further, and I make sure to remove the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue the ring as long as the vessel is empty and the patient's pain has subsided.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are scorchings or pains in the bladder, or if there is vomiting, and you see water and medicines being distilled, then do this to all the instrument called "caustic," and it is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	She is closed, and if it (the wound) is at third degree:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	II d’one part, and I of the other, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And if you see that the wound is chewed by the medicine, and it becomes well smelling with addition, if one can draw the moisture, and bind as soon as possible.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medicines gushing from the vessel, put the end of the lance in the moisture, and draw it out through the opening that is there.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw the moisture from the lance, and then strongly bind the opening with the cord.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters and it comes to the bladder now, then the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of the clitellum that is used to clitorise the bladder:
si est ci:	If it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or gold, and it is the head higher:
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And it is from the side or the line that it is cut:
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you saw clitorised the bladder, then it forms a double-layered penis between the two seats, and heat the other moisture over the fire:
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then cut the clitoris in the angle, then hold your hand on the vagina until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the vagina.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have the vagina, then take a piece of gauze, and make a circle, and the needle should pierce it round.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then cut the strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as we do with the dough, and put ointment, oil, and water, and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you have done with the vagina, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the vagina.
de la piere	Of the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have spoken of the ways of cutting, and the extraction of assembled medicines.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I said the difference between the incision and the other signs, and in what kind of incision one should operate for size.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the uterus;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you about it openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the incision which occurs in the bladder is more common in children, and it is a sign that the uterus has leaped out of the bladder, resembling a sudden increase in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and if it is opened widely, and the woman pains her uterus, and it can be done many times, and then it becomes red.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And at the mouth of these leaps, they found.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And the treatment of children up to four years old is light, and it is hard on the joints, and it is harsh in the limbs that are between the joints and the limbs;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is lighter for those who have large wounds than for those who have small ones;
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to treat the patient, if we first clean the wound with a cloth, we must clean all the feces that is inside the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never closes once it has been pricked.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and stand up and move to the side, if the wound descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not come out at any time from the top;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then place the patient between your hands, and his hands are below his thighs, if the bladder is all inclined towards the side;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then you will see the fire cautery, and touch it.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the prick in the spine, then cut immediately at the prick.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not hurt at all, if your index finger shows oil from the left hand, or if your nail is broken, then the patient should be careful.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and pull on its base, and feel the prick, and when you feel it with your finger, if the bone is at the top of the thigh.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press on your finger, and pull the thread out at the end where you sawed.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand to the top of the clavicles, and his left hand to the bone that is bare at the part where the tail is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he pours the spumonius, because it is the form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And they make between what is between the clavicles and the foundation, not with a milieu but on the cost of the left nail.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And it should be above the incision, and your wounds should be at the foundation or tail, and the tail should be large enough to pass through if it is wide by defense, and should be narrowed, according to the quantity of the incision, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	By chance, the pressure if it must be applied, which is firmly, will give way to sense of work.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and you should know if it has a piercing or angle, and margins.
si est griés a issir;	If it is curved to issue.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if it is part that is sutured, appears as a gland, and curves, whose exit is lighter.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	For the size of the celi, if it has angles and margins, make it larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not give way, then you must pull on the pins that are like a lime at the head, by pulling on the pin to pull the piercing if it does not slip.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	If you do not use the instrument skillfully at the head,
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you do not use it skillfully at all, then the wound may become larger, and if it is not detached, then it may be tightened with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more than one wound, then first stitch the largest one at the top of the bladder, then close it, then pull out, and the smaller ones after that, if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is left untreated, it can lead to a large wound and further injury.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things come to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or the urine comes out unnoticed by the one who does not know how to sew.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But all your efforts to draw or to break the nails, as long as you do it piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, if you use the wound of cinnamon and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and then put on gently moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and pink rose and cold water, to soothe the bleeding;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then let the patient lie down on his side, and do not slip the cinnamon oil on the wound.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if the joint is well oiled with oil and wine, then apply the ointment of finicky and basilic, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if the wound becomes inflamed and corrodes in the plaice and crusts of cinnamon, and the sand is retained in the bladder, which is held by a part like this without jumping with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	1. If you do not remove the point from the wound, then the blood will flow out and cause infection.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	2. Then lift the wound of pain and swelling and scarring, and help it in all ways you know, as long as it is healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	3. And it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, that you bind the thighs, and gather the medicines at the knee.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	4. And if the wound is small, and it is directed towards the groin, and it is not infected, and the urine does not issue;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	5. If this advice is not followed, then you must cut it many times, which is an excuse for the size of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already done that.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will prepare it according to this form and make it at a 30-degree angle, with one side being the base.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a knife and loosen the flesh around the wound, so that it cannot enter the vein.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then trim the edges of the wound gently, as far as it reaches the piercing.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the edges of the wound in your hand around the piercing as much as you can, until you can feel the other side of the piercing.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If a lot of urine comes out, then press your hand on the part where the wound is being made that has been loosened by the flesh.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks, and it jumps with the urine, and the wound is gushing blood.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	When you do not want to do this for any reason, if you cut through the skin and then the bone, you should make the incision as close to the bone as possible, then remove the bone, clean the wound, and freeze the blood that is in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the bone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	There are several cases where a piercing is not done correctly in women, and if it has never been done before, and the patient is distressed by the caregiver, and is defended by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	The second sentence translates to: "And it is not possible to find a woman who does not fall into mirrors, even when she is cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	The third sentence translates to: "And if by chance one cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	The fourth sentence translates to: "And if the wound of the woman is more than the wound of the man, because it requires a more profound size. And if it needs to be sewn, then it is necessary that you know a skilled hand, and if you do not know, then the truevise on, and if you do not have one, then the subtle mirror;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	The present text presents a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what you command of the incision of the piercing.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look well if the woman is virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	and it is necessary to put his duty or foundation and seek the piercing:
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she is true, if she is constrained to do her duty, and the midwife recommends that she does her duty or with the midwife, and wants to press her left hand on the uterus:
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	and if she is true, if it is necessary to move her virginity greatly from the entrance of the uterus as far as the root of the thigh:
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then follow the piercing at the root of the thigh opposite the tender mile, where it is most sensitive, and it feels the piercing in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and does not move its two largest muscles around the piercing or elsewhere, and it is of the first small size.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then, measure the size of the leg, if you feel the piercing so sharp that it cannot be removed until the wound is healed, and know that there are many ways to prick.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	It is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and bent, and those that have thorns.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you suspect any appearances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	If it is not set, if it puts vitriol on the shoulder, and holds it for an hour until it is stained.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, until the wound is healed, and have stitches that I have told you in the extraction of the wound to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if it is not set, and it is the artery that is cut, if it puts powder on the shoulder and tightens and bandages and binds, and does not resume this, and leaves the wound and does not open it, by chance the patient dies.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the pain of the wound is eased, and you read the book, if you return to your work, as long as the piercing is still fresh.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia surgery
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Dew is nothing but an assembly of water or white soap, which is dissolved by the urine, which contains the semen.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "soap," and never truly in the fabric of the semen, if one cares that it is not the other semen.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And this is the curdled sperm between the white soap that we have said.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And there was nothing else.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this grease is such that it comes from the seeds, and it is expanded by that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it come from percussion on the sperm, and this soap is of many colors.
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	Or it is declining in color to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or white water, and this comes more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	This is the sign to attend this assembly, as it is either white and clear or as we have said, if the abscess is pierced, it will be long and look like an oath, and it will not open its pores, as it is moist throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it is moist within the same cloth, if the abscess is pricked with a part of the feces, and because one thinks it is other oaths.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if the moisture is between the hide of the abscess and the white flesh, it feels well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	When you know the color of the moisture, if you probe all the introducer, with the form it is before here.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introcution, judge which is denser.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we operate by fire, if the patient is healthy according to our ability and the fullness of his heart.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then the surgeon takes hold of his back, with something high on his side, and removes a piece of cloth from him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then he opens his left side, and commands the assistant to open the right side, and extends the scissors to one of the two costals near the kidneys.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then he takes the spatula and cuts the abdominal muscle from the pubic bone to the tip of the hip, and makes a straight incision through the abdominal muscle, making sure not to cut too deeply so as not to cause pain.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then, using the sharp point of the lancet, remove all the thorns from the large pustule, and then insert your fingers, and it will become less painful.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the corner of the pustule, but only the lancet.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cover all or piece by piece the chest of it, so that if the pustule returns, you will know how to treat it.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the wound jumps to your hand, then reset it in the limb as soon as you have completed the surgery with the lancet.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, assemble the two ends of the thorns at one point, then treat it like other wounds, as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	If you suspect the urinary bladder is affected by another disease, if you believe that the veins are hanging, in doubt the evacuation of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the umbilicus at all the hanging veins, and remove the bladder, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the wound is assembled in two parts, these are the branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you cut the other part in the same way as the first dislocation, then apply the oil to the wound, and put soft ointment on the swelling.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another soft linen on vine and oil, and on the two umbilici, and double-folded strips of cloth, and tie it to all the parts according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two thongs, and use them made of fine thread according to this manner and they should be sewn together by stitching in the groove of the breeches, and some of them prick at the back, and the others at the part on the side.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two thongs are sewn together in the remaining loop of the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and never has this fire cautery been used on the large piece of iron, and it is that you prick the fine cultivated cautery and cut the leather of the quilts, and if it is as we have said, then if the white that contains the ague is discovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce it with the nails, and scorch at this subtle cauterization.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And you will succeed in all ways that you can think of, as long as you are persistent.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and make sure the fire does not touch the ear.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and you are confident that this work is more beneficial.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and keeps away from dislocation and makes sure the size is correct.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing else makes you worse, or dislocation of the joint or another thing, if you treat what makes you worse, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	If the patient is not cooperative and does not wait for this chapter due to its horror, then there may be a perforation. As I said, and if you are certain by the meanings we have said that the dislocation is here, then place the patient on their side with their legs raised.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Pierce the abscess in the lower part of the circumference, and make the perforation as long as possible.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And make the incisions wide enough so that all the pus can flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put a bandage on the wound, and tie it tightly, and leave it to drain until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	When the pus does not ooze from the wound in the mouth of the wound, if it comes to pass that you cut a pen or instrument used to drain the pus of the hydropaths, because it forms like this before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and widens the wound, and cleans it, and re-assembles after six months or more, and when it is re-assembled as before, and in its passage through the joints passes the pain;
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the hernia.
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Cleans that in the section of this ramification there is more fear in more dispositions, because it seems to me that we should leave it;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the evacuation and appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say that all abscesses come from corns, and they also include;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is by case;
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by excessive sweet and acrid matter, which is expanded by corns, or by percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess corresponds to that of the corn;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not cause pain, and is an abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance, there are some abscesses that are painful and purulent, and have a dark color, and never come from arteries or veins;
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is by artery, if it is sewn up according to the placement of the suture, when you press on your two fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and only that you touch with your two fingers.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	This one that is made of vein graft is sewn up according to its placement with the two fingers, and can well make the size like this appearance, and like the others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the corner of the bone, then the wound is high, and the thread is put in white soap, and release the suspension of all parts of the bone.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the bone is already sewed with these threads, then you must pull the bone and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If it is stuck in the fist, or if it is caused by the veins being blocked, then it comes that you deliver all of the thistle, and the cup returns around.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the child is from below, and it is all born, and you pull out the umbilical cord, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your wounds are completed, apply the smooth linen oil and rose oil and wine to other cures as long as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the hernia.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	These are some abscesses surrounded by a surrounding layer resembling a berry, with the softening of the tissues, and the patient groans as it happens.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is well done and promptly, and we will tell you the chapter of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you place the patient on the elevated seat, then lift the suspender of the thighs to your two hands, to all the members that are near the edge, and mark the masters, and extend them.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then, sharpen the spatula and cut large through the place where the veins are found, as they are discovered, and then scorch from every part, just as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then, insert a needle or it has a double filament, and tie it to the first knee or the one from which it came, and tie it to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then, cut the flesh evenly, according to the length of the course, and cut off the rotten moisteners.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then, treat the wound as you would with others, or if necessary, retract the bowels, so that no vein punctures the intestines.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For there is no harm in it, and all the veins come into view, so it comes to treat the cuts at all the veins.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If he does not lose his strength due to the incision of the veins, and they become thin and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The evacuations of this wound are by section that comes out or by cutting, or by extension to the belly in the part of the abdomen, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the veins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either due to cutting or by extension, and these two methods of causing the wound are:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs of this extension is when it comes suddenly and often, in long stretches, and there is no sudden stop.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscess becomes larger until it reaches the stomach, because the pus presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it's of sudden facial pain, which brings on pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear, less the skin, and this is from the intestines and the heart of sudden facial pain.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never has the circles been sent down with the intestines, and it is held in check, and great pain is suffered by the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for fear, because it cannot be escaped.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way to open a vein if you command or assist the patient to hold the intestine in their hand at the wound, if they can enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then, place your hands on their neck, and gently pull their chin.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then, take hold of the curtain, and cut all the hair on both sides.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then, cut the tendons of the limbs according to what you can handle for opening the wound, and make them long enough to fit.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then, scrape off the white hair that is on the skin of the limbs, as much as it can be seen from all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then, cut your index finger along the line where the hair is on the leg, between the white hair that is under the skin of the thigh and the second hair, and cut it off.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	Then move the left hand to grasp the knee, and hold the white side of your right hand up towards your elbow, and gently pull the finger towards the thumb.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the minister to extend the finger at the top, and let go of whatever is behind the limb.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And ask your servant if he has no intestines wrapped around or white flesh hard, and if you find nothing, then cut open the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or if there is a thick thread made of 10 threads, and cut it behind the white flesh which is after the skin of the fingers.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After measuring, then cut the hairs that appear to be threads, as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie them with thread, which we have mentioned as being of great strength for the leather of the soles, of a strong line of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the threads of the hairs, and tie them into two parts, so that no one of the scissors that cuts can enter into us, that the hair does not happen.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And lay the thread according to the first long thread, and after these two threads leave the thread which is of great strength for the leather of the soles, of a strong line of two parts.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then according to the rules that the foot carries.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then proceed to the part where the leather of the thighs is loose, whether it is without a sole or a heel, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then spread fine oil on the skin, and make incisions, and then spread the line that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is the white suet ever cauterized that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this is often done, and leave the line as it is for him.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it lags in the cloth, then raise it with hot water, and apply what we have said, as long as it is.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then, treat the wound with another treatment, as long as it is completely healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia surgery
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said it was made like the viscera which is assembled like the veins, in a similar way that you tie the arteries, after which the cut is lightly made on the outside.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then, close it with a thread, and treat the wound of that which operates, as long as the veins are tight.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is completely healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Never does gangrene come to angry wounds, as we have said, and open it.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and no bowels come out, and if they do, it's a sign of serious illness, and repair them all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if it drains too much at this point, if it believes the wound or syphilis, as long as the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this is due to the extension of syphilis, which we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes soft and narrows the lips and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and never has a cure been made in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	The patient's shoulder pops out of its place between your hands, then pull the leg away from the rupture, which is swollen and large according to the quantity of three.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then remove the scar that is loose from the skin, then take your finger and place it on the shoulder appearing to have more scar.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	Then press your finger at the lower abdomen, then count the two limbs appearing to have more scar from the finger tip to the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the leg from the knee, and do not pull on the scar or stretch the urethra or anything else, as I have told you in the care of the ramification of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then the treatment by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the strings, if the wound is cleansed and treated, as soon as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scar is firm and has no appearance of a fracture, and the cauterization is more effective at this distance.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of leather of the thongs.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times are softened the hair of the beard in any man, because the hairs that are densified are softened, and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is a task, when one sees the beard being treated, to make the patient bend over, and the barber cuts the softened hair on the natural hair.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, first the excess of the softened hair is at three stitches or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the stitches, and the barber as with other wounds, as long as it is healthy, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	1. The text does not provide a sentence to
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	1. Injuries that are caused by violence are classified in our law, and this is why I do not want to discuss them in detail in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	2. It is necessary for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	3. The other reason is that the injuries are classified according to the response of the patient when asked about them and their treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	4. And the other reason is that we often have to perform surgery on animals for their benefit, such as on sheep and lambs, and goats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	5. Therefore, injuries are classified in these two ways.
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	Either by attraction, or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we make by attraction, let our hands be in hot water, as long as they are softened and while.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then pull on your hand, as long as it is back in place and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the austerity of size:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you pull the best, and press the leather of the joints to your left hand, then release the suspender, and cut each knot at each hip, when you have well burned them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no sore or subtle sore that is near the veins.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this manner of cauterization is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because attraction wears out with chance, no matter the size of the bones, and the beast desires luxury.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then cure the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	The translation of "des hermofrodites" is:
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Heroism is according to two ways for men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is that between the two bones it is open as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and never once in cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is for women, and it has as much hair as a vine and the members.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the care of the mouth and stomach is that you cut all the loose charms and cure them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, men whose urine leaps through the skin of their thighs, if there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of temptation.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tenting is a char that is placed on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and no women have had such a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you bind the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or fingers, and lightly cover it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not let it get too far, because the blood does not come, then the cure of another cure until it is healthy.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	For another char that is not in the mouth of the mare, and the employs, and by chance it jumps forward, and appears as the appearance of a cow, and therefore they called the old "cow's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are able to copy it, if as we have said, and cure it as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	However, if the nature of the woman is not well understood, or the cough is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that came from it.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by a strange char, or a subtle facial or espadrilles, and is made in front of the mare, or the cost, or the shoe, or whatever.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and the design, and the birth, and by chance the flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this if it is by the restraint of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the head is pressing against something, whether it's your body or another object.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is hard to remove, and it is close as it is, if you hurry, and it will turn back.
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then the two levers are formed, as long as the subtle fac is removed and over the tight ones.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take linen and oil, and put it on the limb, and make the woman lie down every hour, if it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is hard and sudden, then you must gently hold the joint as if it were a slate of marble.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the joints are cold, if the bone is spent and the flesh.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and use the remedies that quench blood, such as mercury, dragon's blood, incense, and a large amount of urine.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then make a large cut, if the wound cannot be sewn.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and it should be long, and a tent of dry linen is made.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat other wounds as needed while they are still healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marriage there comes a dislocation, if it is necessary to cut according to this manner, then it should not be enchanted with pins.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the incision of the scarlet fever, which is in the marriage, it should not be touched with firmness.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Embroideries are open veins that without customary scarring, and when they become old, they become thick.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	In the division of appearances and signs, I will mention those that require care.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are formed in the marriage, do not appear by feeling, unless it is with a firm cure.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the marriage can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary that you put the woman in a cool house, then remove the nails from the horseshoe, and cut off the roots of the horsehair, then powder the medicines restricting blood, as well as those for dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then cut the horsehair and put it in cold water for an hour, then dry it.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if the blood comes out, if you put it in a decoction of sumac and the juice of grenate pomes and gall and similar things, then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and vinegar, and apply it to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it is inflamed, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, make him lie down on his back and tie his arms tightly;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take the wine, and the juice of plums or willow with it, and make him drink.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when he has vomited, take care of the wound with an ointment as soon as it is healthy.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the ointment called "albathir" is red and resembles the spicy herb "thula", if it is effective, then it is similar to the turmeric.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then take care of him as soon as he is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of the abscesses of the married woman
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come to the married woman, such as chancre and other purulent abscesses, herpes and fistulas and blisters and chancroids and abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I give in this treatment the first aid for the wound that comes in the marriage, which is not the worst of wounds but is caused by bows.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you see the fire cautery, then look at whether the wound is still in the beginning of its arrival, and see for caution and fever, and if it becomes red, you will see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	However, do not force the pearl, but make it as long as the pain is eased.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then make the patient sit on the bed, and have two pillows under his head, and support his back and assemble his limbs as to hold the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let his thighs be expanded, and put on his boots above his knees, and tie them well with a bow.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then proceed the dressing towards the left side of the chest, and insert the instrument used to open the mouth of the marriage, and after that comes the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being inserted, you fix the rait first to know the fitting of the marriage, so that what comes out of the instrument does not fit more than it should, and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the rait is larger, it is necessary to cover the fitting of the marriage with cloth, so that the rait does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	It is necessary that he places the instrument's horn at the joint, and grinds the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess is open, and it is touched with wet hands, if it comes into contact with the head, at the spinal marrow.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is visible, it comes that you put in the wound soft tentacles in olive oil or green vegetable oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And put the tent of the wound at the edge of the marsh, and put through the marsh and through the clean soft tentacles in the water or in the mud that are cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the cure after two days of ointment coming to this, as long as it is healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And no time the wound and the plague are raised by honey and vinegar, and then vinegar or roots of lilies and Aristotle are cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then comes the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is dressed in the marsh, then it comes to your attention that you should not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Most important is the dance where she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are such when you see the woman press against the wall, and desires to smell the aroma of amber.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	However, do not delay in giving birth to the children.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then you know that these children are according to the natural figure, and they are from your own chief, and the second one with him.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	When you see these signs, if it is necessary to lightly press on his abdomen, if the child is cold.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	If he descends from his throne, and if it is with him, and the marriage of his superfluities by good cleaning.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes on its own piercings, and it comes from the chest or neck, and the hands, or it comes from the belly or stomach, and it is converted by chance with his collar, and by other harmful figures.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is necessary for the dance that she be skilled and subtle in these things, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures of how one should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	When the child comes out of its head naturally, and the mother gives birth with great effort, and her virtues are weak, if it is placed on a pillow or the women hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and its nature is olive oil or fenugreek, and then boil the baby between its two little feet, and this is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the second one, and cut as much as the moisture that is left behind.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and cut the woman's stomach as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clyster the woman with muslin of fenugreek with olive oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then I will prepare and administer the anesthetic, and hold their mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If you are now ready, I will insert the enema.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the hands do not come out quickly, it will be necessary to gently move them a little at a time.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they do not go in, the woman should sit on the edge of the bed, and gently lift the feet up.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then the woman should lie down on the ground, and tie her feet together so she does not fall.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands do not go in, and the enema dies, she should hold her hands on the side that is closest to her, remove the child, and reset it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the child's foot that was cut off
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the children come to their toes, if they can put it on high.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it a little at a time, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then pull on the toes and stretch it a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump like a knot, if it is commanded to pull, and I make it tighter by condensing?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps, may God see.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump high jumps, as we have said, if the shoe is tightened a little at a time until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not jump as we have seen, say that it is made of muslin, oil of silk, and melted rubber, and all in cement.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and make it like the nature of a woman in labor and this ache, then make her sit in a warm bed until the costels are dry.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is wet with sweat, make her milk a bit and then put her on, and leave her for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on the seat, then make her stand and shut her mouth and nose, and press lightly on the belly because the child is now coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the issue of the child with its gums
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if she holds it with her hands a little at a time.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then hold the baby on its belly, and let its feet hang down, and then gently shake the cradle.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	The patient folds their hands a few times, and then places them on their stomach, and presses the knees towards the chest as much as possible.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	If the fetus does not jump, then take your hands and move them, then move the belly forward, and then pull your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	The child folds its hands a few times.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	Instruct the woman to push as much as possible until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand during birth.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to bring the hand back.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be brought back, then lift the woman up and move forward.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If it cannot move, if I do not rule over it with my hand, and the legs form;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then the muscles I have mentioned will be wasted.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not give birth, if I set it on my seat, then it will study the return of the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and the child follows its natural form, and I make it smaller, and I command it to suck as much as the child can.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the issue of the child from its neck, and its hands expanded, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the dance marks its hand, then turn it slightly and lightly, and the child.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, if it puts on the muscles of the elder and the oil, as we have said, then it commands it to move slightly and lightly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	When you have this done, if it is placed on the thigh, and it is commanded to be pressed down.
et la fai esternuer.	Then it will be flattened.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. In the same way for all the second part.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this manner to the rest of the body, if the rest is not held in your hand, as long as there is moisture.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if it can be held on the face and neck, if the bandage is not tightened, and the patient dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then bind the child's leg, as long as you have it in place, and command the woman to press down never.
adonques si istra legierement.	If you handle it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	It is said that they are born many times, and never in the third or fourth month.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is a strange thing, and few come to know it.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are strange, and they do not live long, and have little name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and are destroyed by the sickle which devisages them, which is bound to the hood.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And they never come naturally like all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come seriously, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and it is made quickly and gently what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And make it as it is worth to greet.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	No times are formed in the marrying I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the great joy, and cover that the sick dance, because by chance similar things come to it;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If you make it according to this that is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the dead or pregnant child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to open with hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it happens that you should cut yourself on the woman's body and there is no accident or she dies of pain.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it happens that the woman is thin on her back and her head hangs down, and her legs are raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife applies the cautery of the second part, or if she is lying in bed so that she is not treated for the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then grease the mouth of the midwife with warm oils using musk and fenugreek and the seeds of flax, then grease her hands with these oils and these musk.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then the bones are lightly cut, then the shoulder or the collarbone that can be bent is freed, and one should hold the child steady until it descends from its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the bones are found in the ears or neck or mouth or nose or beard or chin or breasts, and if it is severed, then it should be cut off and the costal muscles are separated. If the costal muscles are sutured with threads, they should be removed after a few days.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary to cut the bone in the left hand, and place the beak between the two fingers of the right hand, and it is cut lightly in all these ways that we have mentioned, until it fits into the empty one.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then find another onion, or the other one that you have, if the extraction is equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then the onion is even when moving from one side to the other, by gripping it with both hands, and so the onions are held with both hands, if it is in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part is removed, if there are any of its two oils left in that part, and take them out in that part, and handle the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it is not removed, then put this onion or higher up on the hand, and do so until it is all used up.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot return due to the strain, then you must wrap it around as tightly as possible, until it is entirely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then the bandage is tied around the ankle or knee joint, and if it is done with one hand and the other foot, then you must do it with the other hand and the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is difficult to deliver, or there is a sudden rush of blood, then you must cut the sharp spatula between your two hands, and sew the head and remove the blood.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you may bring it to the instrument called "almidach," if its form comes with the menstrual blood or after the chapter.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And similarly, it is natural for the child to learn on its own.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And then, if the bones are sharp, and the head is forced and held in place as much as possible, even if it is painful, until the moisture that has come out or will come out stops.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot be pulled out, then use the method you have chosen.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is twisted in the belly or dislocated from the ribs, then you must pierce it as much as the moisture allows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is in its mother's womb, if it feels a light attraction, and the cord is attached to the woman's mouth.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted in the belly or in the stomach, then you must stretch it by wrapping it around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and when they feel the belly or the thighs, as long as the moisture is present.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if another bone is broken, and the limb is swollen, if blood comes from the wound, and it is drawn out of the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then I bite or II, and it is drawn out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is pulled back by the swelling, and there is no pain, then it must be dressed with things that are moist and heavy.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the dressing is applied, and it is made to soften and moisten.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	If the child is on its chest, and you place it evenly, then do not move it as we have said in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is not possible, then if the leg is broken and nothing of the second part remains.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, do not move it as we have said in the cases of abscesses that come from wounds.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if the evacuation of blood comes, then if it is put in astringent and restricted, and other treatments are not done.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman in whose belly some children had died, and then consulted another who said this, and caused the death of others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time, some abscesses appeared in the wound, and inflamed as soon as they were seen, and began to make great pressure.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought it long, and could not open the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong attraction with my fingers, and after a few hours, more than others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I want the wound, and in turning the hands over, as long as the woman was better at one point.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	The woman's long hair is tightly bound, and it is held back a little with a piece of cloth.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I have not forgotten this chapter because when the master is faced with an unusual thing, I know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the shoulder back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Then comes the form of the pressor, which consists of the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and it turns to the heads of the two legs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Indeed, the horns are more subtle and restrictive, and are made of flat or bowed wood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth is of the width of a tooth, and the margin of the trees is one and a half palm lengths.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the second line, the limbs are described as being twisted or bent, which could be a result of dislocation or other injury. The term "half palm" is not clear without additional context, but it might refer to a specific type of injury or measurement. The phrase "one more" suggests that there may be multiple instances of this injury or condition.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these twisted limbs are bitten into the mare's mouth to open them when turning the two corners. This sentence suggests that the limbs are being manually manipulated or corrected by a human, likely a veterinarian or animal handler, to realign them and alleviate pain or injury. The term "cornes" is not clear without additional context, but it might refer to specific parts of the limb or joint that need to be addressed.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, which is more subtle and lighter in appearance, can be made of flat or square wood or basswood, depending on the appearance of the nails. This sentence suggests that the limbs can be repaired or corrected using different materials or techniques based on the appearance of the nails or other factors. The term "tenailles" is not clear without additional context, but it might refer to the nails or fasteners used in the repair process.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and if you see, from two fingers wide, and it must be large;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the vagina fully open, if the woman lies on her back, the thighs spread apart, then adjust the two dislocations together in the vagina, and hold the instrument's handle between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then move your hand along the entire instrument, according to how much you see the vagina opening, as long as it is comfortable for her to do so.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is all around, and is multiplied in its appearance.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you appear to the patient, the more hurriedly you act, the higher the chances of success for the patient.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	2. If you do not despise the instrument because you have not seen it, for its requirements are not easily overcome.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second child is held in the womb, if you command the midwife to hold the umbilical cord, then carefully cut it, and then pull it out of the vagina, and keep your hands on the mouth and anus.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps for joy at this, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then I can, and make a puncture or a cut, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the mother, such as cloves, cinnamon, chamomile, calamus, cardamom, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All of these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or placed under fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a spigot or stopper in it, and the other end in the mare's mouth, and heat it until the vapor rises from the mare.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then the fire is extinguished, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second part is difficult.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this cure, and is not better, then order the woman to moisten her left hand in olive oil or musk, and then blow into it, and she will receive the second dose.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds it, if she pricks and extends it a little at a time, until the mare does not resist the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But they want to move lightly to the right and left, and then draw it.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and dries out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the arrow is stretched, we have said the treatment is to tighten and fumigate with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not all of what we have said, then keep that you do not pull too hard.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the arrow, you tie it to the woman's thigh, then apply ointment from a four-drug mixture.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If it swells and is reset, and comes back out.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But if it happens that she comes out with an unpleasant smell from the stomach and head, and makes the patient wince.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If, then, there are convenient fumigations for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have proved fumigations of cress and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is made with it that it fumigates the woman with the retention of flowers and secondines if this is.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it seems like a dog, and puts the large head under the nature, and the large heads under the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and it is the fumigations with charcoal, and the skin as long as it is dry, and another one begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to test the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet felt the foundation, but they have been exposed to some subtle smoke.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it comes to the point that one perceives that the bone is exposed in its place, and does not perceive any other bone perforated, and avoids the sharp points of the spatula, and does not touch the ligament.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply soft cloth wet with vinegar and oil, then the care of ointment as soon as it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not happen, if you put on a piece of cloth and leave the wound open, and if it is not sewn up when the child is seen in the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes a case of soaking of wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it comes to the point of soaking.
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	If you treat, as we have said about the cataplexy.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula with great foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow when they come from the deeper parts of the foot, or in the spaces between the two parts, if there is one or more fistulas.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	When the node is old, if it is worked on, and the moisture is applied to the wound or subtle bowels, and never are these fistulas present.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	They are known by the fact that they occur when the patient has an evacuation or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance some fall.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistulas are located in the bladder and half of the vagina.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach the joint of the uterus and the outlet of the vagina.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And it is known that the fistula is present at the foundation, and is not a fistula.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	When you have found your point of entry or foundation, and insert a fine wire of iron or silver into the fistula when it has no curves.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there are curves, then insert a small noose of wire or horsehair, as you feel the noose or hair in your hand.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no emission of gas, no pain, and no fever, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	Make sure it does not pierce through.
si te haste dou curer.	If you feel any pain.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the uterus or carried by the urine, if the urine jumps, and cannot be soaked by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	And if it pierces through the joint of the finger, if the noose or hair touches the flesh.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no tortuosity and the pain is not excessive, then it is because it is in its proper place, and no remedy is needed by itself;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of proud people who enter them;
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not Persian and not ancient, there is hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient suffers from pain in their hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and they gently lift the legs until they reach their thighs, and they have their thighs inclined towards their belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then apply a bandage of rain, or if it has knots, as long as you see or the bandage comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain in the joint, it means that the bandage has come off.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And if you feel between your feet or thighs, then check that the bandage is correct, therefore check that it is in place.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If you cannot find it, no matter how hard you try.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that one can always find it, but it is not easy.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And if you help, if you cut the cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as it is said.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the bone is very hard when it is inserted into the fistula, as long as it fits well at the foundation.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and cut it twice or three times, as long as you think that these points must be sharp, which resemble a quill of a feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	then the treatment of the wounds are made smooth and round, as long as it fits, then the treatment of the ointment enchanting the bone and soaking.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is in good health, then so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	And if not, no other name can be healthy.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it fits tightly, and does not perforate the foundation that is at the bottom, and between your thumb and index finger, and you see the fistula at this point where the covering does not reach;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the head of the fistula, and it grows longer before the tent, and then the cauterization is done afterwards, as soon as it reaches the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be delivered to the tent, and will hurt.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then defend those that seem like a feather of a swallow, and there are none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not please you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire cauterization or medical boil.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery assembles two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the surety of these dislocated bones, and the stopping of blood and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of tented wounds can be made with burrs or with sharp knives, as long as it does not bleed too much, and the bones will be set in the wound.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then, treat the wound of the sourd sores with uncooked dough, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return often.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes suddenly with great force, and it is moved away from the body, and its base is damaged, and you should investigate this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and it is the cloth or silk or charcoal, if not been that way by chance, then it is due to the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you burn it as we have said, or you cover it with lint and care for it as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not let it get too far, that you do not cover the foundation which holds the foundation, and you will expel the exudations through the desired sense.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if it is healthy, or you remove that covering and the muzzle before it is covered with the foundation, or by attempt or another instrument appointed;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then mend the wound that is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part that is more firm the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And no time are fistulas according to this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And when you bind the tent in the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation of the skin, if you take a tent percussive at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you cut it in two, and pull the tent through all of it in the fistula as much as it is at the head:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is present at the edge of the foundation, then remove the thread of that pertus; if you reach the end of your foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and cut off the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and pull them apart, and leave one or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not constrain it more than the threads that are between those two, and tighten.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound as long as it is sore and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perceive, if you try to feel it in all ways that you can, it will not be too difficult.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make the dressing too tight, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the sharp-spined thorn that was used to make the fistula if it is full and of one piece, part and stretch.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, because it is not possible to cop (or perhaps "cope") with what must be coped with, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the embryos.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Ammories are according to two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Or they are made of denser material, like resin grains, and they become smaller and larger, and when cut, they have one or more, and they make the foundation stronger and at the top of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	However, those that are denser have little moisture, and when cut, they have a small piece of sharp citron or a small piece of sand, and they have the color of the core;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the cure of those who have dug the foundation, if you instruct the patient to sprinkle with water as much as possible, until the foundations are firm and the legs appear, and they see the threads.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and it can hold nails, or if you keep it in your nail, then it covers in its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the uncut cannot hold by its moisture, then it is placed at the edge, or on the cloth, or from a piece of camomile.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract them from your hands, then cover them, and powder with no hot powders that are in the fire cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If you cauterize as instructed in the chapter of cauterization, then apply other treatments as necessary until it is healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if they do not come apart, then apply a cauterizing agent such as clisterine, which is bitter and sharp. Wash the area where they are stuck, and if possible, open it widely.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patients cannot bear the pain, and their wounds are deeply stuck, then apply a light treatment to relieve the pain.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And if you burn them with your finger or nails, then cover them, and treat them as we have described, until they are healthy and do not fear the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary to undo the stitching according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take one thread, pull it through the eye, and then pull the other end of the thread through the eye, making sure the needle is on the other side. Then, turn the two ends of the thread over the needle and pull them through the eye again, if necessary.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And pull the thread tight, then knot it, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave the excess of the suture to be cut off.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then roll the foundation and soften it with oil or wax, place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is left until they heal, and when they are whole, if the cures of ointment and other cures are done properly, then it will be healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The first sentence translates to: "If the joint is not firmly set.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	The second sentence translates to: "Often, the joint is not firmly set due to moisture in the intestines, and by constriction, and when the disease is severe, and medicine is ineffective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you must return to the point of a splint or your nail that scrapes off the skin, which does not allow it to get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then the treatment as soon as it is healthy, as it is done.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot be healed, then the scratching resumes more forcefully than before, as soon as it is healthy and scorched.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment as soon as it is healthy.
dou fremit	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A small insect is a small appearance about the chest, and it bites often.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And never the fever leaves, and it feels like death, and it comes throughout the body, and more than the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is if you take a brad from a goose feather, or a vulture feather, and put that brad on the fever, as long as it circles around the fever completely outside.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand over all the brad as you cover all around the fever, and set it in place, and pull out the fever from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that I make this of a bone of iron or steel according to this form, and it is subtle and thin and true:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	1. Do not let it escape, but hold it tightly, and press it.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that the cauterization causes the patient to tremble, as it does in this chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of clyster.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	1. Never has a cauterization been made with silver or archaut, or with melted gold or twisted wire.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	1. And never has a cauterization been made with these small and large bites, according to the size of the wound.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and great burn is such that it covers a wide area, or the belly is influenced in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	1. And if there is a deviation or the belly is lying down, as you see, and the head is not felt, then.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and to one of the two costes of the pouch, and in the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and it may be the belly or if it is a vessel of beast or parchment, and it is perceived all around from many punctures, and it must have a spice between each puncture I, then bounce in these punctures I strong thread made of silk or cotton, and assemble the belly as if it were a chevre.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is given, if the line has an instrument before with a strong thread, then stitch.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of urine, or something similar, then the pain will ease slightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the midwife assembles her two hands, as much as she can, then removes the clister, and gently relaxes her legs at the door, and if the medicine seems to help, as much as it can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if she sleeps a whole night, it will be more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you dislocate the abdomen due to disease, and the medicine seems to be working, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the discharge is thick or bloody, or anesthesia, if the clister is also subtle as for the child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of a hidden clyster subtle when the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	we have said in the division of the cure of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we will say the cures of hands and medicine according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the instrument or the wound is made, and of how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things made by wounds are made by the point of the pierce, and the size of the eye and the grip, or the lance, or the stake, or the needle, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or what is made according to the rules of the wounds, like a clyster when it pierces the breast, or the neck, or the belly, or the liver, or the stomach, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple wounds, as the memory comes in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes or goes, if it is not broken, if it is due to grime of the wound or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of apoplexy:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if I make it safer for the head myself, and if it is healthy in the opposite part of the nose;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the patient's fullness of wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not see that it is healthier, then let his meat be lean and do not drink wine and do not eat bread.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put the wound under pressure, and if blood comes out, it will be oily or red, or like wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if he does not apply pressure to the wound, then put it on the wound and it will be fresh at all its base, and it will not move due to the air, dust, which I will mention later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he moves the wound, then apply some ointments, as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a spear and similar, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be reassembled by sewing, if I say as stomach wounds, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it is large, and holds only by a small part of it, then the wound is closed.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then, treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hardness of the leather in the shoe, and instruct the patient to eat large amounts of raw meat, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you have skin or leather for food, and it does not reach the bone, then it should be completely removed and cooked thoroughly, and then it can be cured.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if the wound or vein has been closed without cutting it, and it cannot be healed by medicine, then the wound should be opened and if the skin is loose, it can be tied with a string.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit him, then the cauterization is useless.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then he can be treated lightly:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if you put on this powder that smells like it has not been used, then he will be treated with it:
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	Take some candle and:
sanc de dragon II parties;	burn it in two parts:
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	clay lives three parts, and the fine powder, and apply it to the wound, and pull out as much as it sticks well and joins with all his smoke:
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	And then the limb is well, and it is left to drip, if it does not enflee.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For as long as the medicine is healed, there is no need for it.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never once has it been done with anything but fire, when there is no incense or blood of the dragon, but that the artist has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound is large, at the same time, if I do not put any of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but instead use some digestive ointments, or made of wheat flour from the oven and honey, until it bows down;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of other treatments as long as it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if you pull it with subtle tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about the wounds of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the shoulder
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	A wound comes of the shoulder
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerve, if there is no other means than leaving the treatment, and nothing restrictive is put on it, because it does not harm the nerve and draws it back.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of such is with the cerebral, which is the more sensitive member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but if the medicine is soaked, like chald if it is washed in gentle warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and then washed again in gentle warm water, and other piercings of mine according to this method, and moistened.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if it is bound with bandages, then the treatment is as soon as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are fully developed and the hair is thick and full of bristles, then the prick or lower down the leg.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is coiled, and the blood flows out, then the evacuation of blood comes, and the patient dies, and the cauterization is the most effective.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the neck is coiled, or the tongue, and the head is guided, as long as the meat goes, if the bone is above the throat, and does not touch the head but is replaced according to its natural figure;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then the extraction is performed, and it leaves some scars, then the treatment of discharge as long as it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	If the patient wishes to make an impression on the bone, they can.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	If the patient has pieces of bone, and they are not careful, and if they do not leave enough time for the wound to heal, and it becomes infected and inflamed, then...
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wound is fresh, and powder is applied as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If it has bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then the treatment is as I have described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a wound from a spear or arrow, and the wound is deep, then observe if the wound is bleeding heavily, and if so, apply pressure with the hand of the patient.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	And if the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not fully cooked, and it is fresh at all its pores, if no powder is put on it in the first hour, nor bound with the suet that does not cause it to lose its freshness, and it revives in the chest, and the patient feels better.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But I apply an attractive ointment, and I bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you have no ointment, then put a piece of cotton in the wound for sweetness to dry out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If no spasm comes, nor is there trembling in the chest that does not strain the arms.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	When you see the proper bone arrangements, you should think the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat the swelling with compresses and other remedies as long as it remains healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it does not heal, and you think it has formed an abscess, then do something about it.
si la cure si com on doit.	If the treatment is done correctly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision or a cut, and it is simple, or on the back, if the treatment is done by the one in front of you.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, require stitches.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is small, use powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and the pieces are removed when the wound is healed, then the wound will be healed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	If they do not resist, if the wound is left exposed, if the extractions are aligned.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and other wounds have other limbs judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre." In English,
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocations of the abdomen are large and numerous and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the large wound no time the intestine is leaped, or the intestines are injured by it, by the insertion of others.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stomach is more painful, and no time the small wound is better than the large, because one has to reinsert the intestines several times if one does not put them back in place each time.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	For the intestines swell so much that they feel the pain, if they return more often, and for the reason that it weakens the wound, for the reason that we sometimes have to reset the dislocation of the shoulder, for the reason that it causes great pain and injury.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you say that the intestinal rupture occurs in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common types of abdominal hernia are the abdominal hernia and the hernia in other parts of the body, and the other two types of hernias are common in other parts of the body.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all of them are more common with the abdominal hernia, and I will say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no inflammation in the intestines, and it is a difficult matter to set, this is done by one of the following two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is swollen, treat it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soften an sponge or a damp cloth only, or wash it with cold water and rinse it, and clean the intestines as much as they will absorb.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And no time has it been made to keep the wound closed and it is dead that it does not want to be opened.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the blooming depart, if the intestines are swollen or stretched and the veins are twisted, for this is the cause of the narrow entry of something.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound in the wound with the instrument of coping the blood;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first treatment is dead that it does not cut the size, that no one needs to cut in great need and has not.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the reason for the splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If the thread cuts through the feather and does not pass, and if it looks like this:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs forth, if you return it according to its natural form in its own place, if you can, for this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	If the wound is large and it is in the lower abdomen, then it is necessary that you lay the patient on their stomach, and raise their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	If the wound is in the lower abdomen, then it is necessary that you raise the head and the legs higher than the abdominal walls, and if the wounded part is one of the two, then you should agree that the raised part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And it is necessary to manage what I say about large and dirty wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	The first sentence translates to: "If it hurts slightly, then take your hand and apply wet bandages to all the wounds on your hand, and gather your lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	The second sentence translates to: "This is the common way to stitch wounds. You take an awl or several, according to the size of the wound's depth, then leave the end of the wound open and sew it with a needle thread strong.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	The third sentence translates to: "Then pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the suture thread, which is loose from the leather, as long as you can pierce it from that side, and assemble the two ends of the suture thread with the four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the strain of a double thread through the needle of II part, then assemble the II heads of the wound, and then leave I two spicules, and then choose another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then lay the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you are used to with needles, until all the wound is held in place.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be sharp and not too large, for sharp needles close the wound completely, and very large ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For it is necessary that they be sharp.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and do not thrust the nails too far into the horse's shoulder and leather, which do not hold and cause the wound to reopen in front of the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cover the heads of the nails to prevent them from causing inflammation in the patient's sleep, and use cloths or blankets on the heads of the nails to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of stitching with nails is more convenient in small wounds, because it does not cause an aguille or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it is that you sew the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thread, and they are sewn together with one nail or it has a strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	When you have perceived these four conditions assembled, first reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner we have described for the threads.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and insert a splice between each stitch of the large end of one thread.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch saves the man, and I saw a wound that some had in their bellies, which was caused by a needle, and it was more than one palm wide, and it had intestines that were more than two palms wide, and it was the wound in his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I took the intestine and after it had been out for 24 hours, it was 15 years old, and the wound was healed, and I cured it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And he saw the blood that would not stop, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not cure it with ointment, because I am in II the shoulder where they do not find any, and no medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put on more than twice the amount of cotton lint under the wound, and wash it with honey as often as it is healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or you may say the two ways of dressing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and pull out the thread from the part that is most difficult to sew.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has perceived the right way in the right direction, if you have pulled the needle or cut it or made the thread perceive another part of the difficult part, and make it perceive from another part of the easy part.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And when they understand this method, if you also follow the pliers like they do the hair, and once you shave one side, then you take the other, until the stitching is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, which Galen himself uses, is if it is done correctly by anyone, which naturally brings together the two parts, and applies one end of the beard to the other, in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Insert an awl or beard of iron close to the skin, and make a mark on that part only, and leave the two ends of the beard of hair.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and I make it feel at the part of the wound that is most hurtful to you.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then I make it feel at both parts of the wound that are most hurtful to you.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the worst way to sew and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this word, and no one testifies, you must sew the belly to the needles, or there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And it must be sewn one needle at a time, and the other at another, in the way that these are sewn together.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And you ask if when the fracture is near the stomach, it is the cost more painful than others in the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	They judge the wound if it is like the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	And it is that if you clean the fresh wound with all its blood, but if it has not moved, then reset the intestine and the gut;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then put on the powder enjanning char, and if it has moved, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bowed;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And tie the thread, and be sure of the size, and the match;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as you would with others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you have no medicine, then use this: make a poultice of the bowel, cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other medicine in other preparations, the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound is not a principle member, then use light oil of tamarind or rose oil, and apply it to the edges, and dry the stitches;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If he feels pain or dryness in the bowels, and it happens many times, if the clyster of black wine is given, and at the same time the dryness comes to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And the bowel is hard and sore, and it is lighter than the stomach when it is large.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The small intestine, which is called "young," cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the veins that surround it, as well as the subtlety of the entire body and its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the gush of blood comes from the wound, and it is set in place as the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it becomes dark and turns black, and you must cut the black limb, because it has veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then pull the joint that is between the bones, and hold the head of the arrow until it is fully pulled out of the wound, and then straighten the extraction point where the arrowhead bites.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the bursting of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	If the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were wounded or in the belly of a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And the wound was at the left side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and contained the excrement and vomit.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not stop refining it until it was healthy, and I saw the result.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I see him suffering, I doubt that the patient has no harm in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he has no harm, but delays in better conditions, and eats and drinks.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and there is no one who says that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he should be treated in this way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	first examine large testes, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when he has stretched his mouth over the wound, if she puts it with her lips, so that she draws back her mouth.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then she covers the testis, and this remains if he cannot slip, then she causes another convulsion after in that way until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	And the wound is counted.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the intestine is caught in the abdomen, and there is no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a very fine thread that is sutured with the intestine of an animal, in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this intestinal thread that is free, and then tie it to the head of the other thread I lin thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and count the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of stitching is not worse than according to the course of love and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, then it is similar when it is in one of the intestinal grails, if it does not heal or become healthy, then it should be treated with caution.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	All wounds and abscesses, when they heal, are called 'fistulas' if they are completely closed, and likewise if they are small and rounded.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	A fistula is according to the true node that needs to be hard and bluish, where there is no pain, and it is as fine as the tail of a pegasus.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And never in a clear leap bow, and at other times it is thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Never in a small amount, and at other times quite.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that all wounds that are not healed, and there is no pain, it is only due to one of the eight causes.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This is to know, by the small pain of blood or grief.
ou por sa malice;	or because of malice.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because of the hard teeth, and the mouth, which does not leave it in peace.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or he has too much bowel.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the food is spoiled, and the matter is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the cure.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because of the corruption, which is a plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because of the property in the region, which is slow to digest, and slow to health, and flees by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	If he has veins or not:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have shown you all these causes, signs, and remedies for medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	1. It is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistulas, which is performed by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Wounds that occur in all parts of the corpse's body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For he has fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, intestines, bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if a part that comes from the proper member of the body is affected, and similar to it;
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind are of painful healing, and there is only labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no fistula that comes to the place where I have said it would, and you are a practitioner of the cure, and you see it occurring, then take a tent made of linen or iron, if you wish; if the fistula is straight.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, then search for a small tent made of linen or iron, because the threads will twist around the tortuosity.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula is closed by hands and you do not find it well by tents, then search for the fistula by the other hand, because the moisture is cut from one part to another, and it is cleaned.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then, if you are wise, you will know whether it is bone or flesh, and ask the patient to indicate where they feel pain when you press with your hand, and the limb where it is felt.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know the limb and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or any of the limbs I have mentioned, if the couch follows what I have said, and the force and the crooked ones that are corrupt;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then, when the wound is healed, and the fistula is well-made in the right place, if you press with the couch, as far as you can, then take fine tentacules of medicine ague, and insert them at the end of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that has been accumulated in the fund.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then he puts antiseptic ointments on the healthy skin, as much as needed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healthy by this, then the cauterization is done as we have said, and if the part is corrupted by the fistula, then it is cut out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If it does not hurt the nerves or the principal limbs, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it is discovered that there is infection and blackening, and the patient remains as long as the infection is not completely healed, then the treatment of unhealthy skin ointments is done as much as needed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healthy, and the bowels are not relieved as before, you should know that you are not able to do this:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If the dislocation occurs and you are able to do so, and remove all the corruption, then restore the shoulder.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is in good health, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, you should know that the corruption is too deep, and you will not be able to remove it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other way but to cut it out.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	If it is small and corrupted, and you can remove it with tweezers, if the instrument is suitable for this purpose, and if there are more, then remove them all.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if the moisture is contrary to you, and there is no error, then cope with it and make it char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	If you do not cut the wound an hour ago, then put something to stop the bleeding, and leave it until the pus comes out of the bones, and then the bones will become lighter.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	If it is large bones, such as thigh or knee, if you only treat the infection until blackness appears throughout the area, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	If it is a large part of the bone that has become corrupted and comes out of the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it is necessary to cover and protect all the infected area and treat it as soon as possible.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of an example of a fissure that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can learn from it and help in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	It was a young man who had a pain in his leg for many years, which was caused by the heart, so that the matter came to the leg, and he was swept away by a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but they overlapped so much that the abscess was opened, and it corrupted with matter, and became a fissure, and there came out pus that all the bowels were torn out and the heart was full of moisture.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And for the first two years, and they received no knowledge in the art of hands, as long as I was called, and I saw their leg and the medicines used to cure them, and what died from the pustules of great pain.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And it became red in the cheeks of youth, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at the other part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I thought furthermore, and in one of the pustules I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and decayed, and it came from the bone itself.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was he who appeared from the corrupted bone, and I made sure there was no other corruption, since that was what I was.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to restore the wound of soreness with long tents, and it could not be sewn.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	Then I returned and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and it was decayed, and then I set the bone, and I thought about sewing the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not cut through the bone so far that it would reach all its parts, then I restored it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was healed and sutured tightly, and I did not want to return to the operation because of the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because the evacuation of blood is often, but it was completely healthy, and a hard stone was found in the bone, and it was well positioned and had no harm or contradiction at all, nor in the air nor coming out.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken at any joint of the arm, then it should be set in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take two pieces of wood, and pull on them, and command that it does not extend higher than the top of the bone.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And then put another piece of wood that is larger than the first one, and lie it across the bone, and hold the head, so that you can pull the broken end out of the bone, and cut the head off at the joint where you see it set, so that it does not break the head.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And then put a bandage or a table around the bone to cover the broken end of the bone.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	It is necessary to soak as much as possible and can be seen and felt the corruption, and soak again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the environment or a part of it, if the cart is taken out completely.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put the incision in place, and then it is of one part to another the corruption, and the soaking water is long from the corruption pit, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, if the corrupted joint is cut, and it is the bone or it contains another part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption spreads to the continuation of the second joints, if there is no other enemy than cold;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	If the corruption is in the fingertips or the toe, if it is painful there, but it must be that you investigate this corrosion as to how it opens;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and it is made in all ways that you can think of, but the vein or the nerve will not oppose you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and you ask that the incision and the soles cover these bones which are many, according to the seat of the bones and their appearance, and their bigness and their subtlety, and their growth and their diminution, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason, it is necessary to adjust the appearance of each instrument of its kind.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And you claim that the work will show the instrument you will use, according to the knowledge of this art, and testifies the ways of the diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you are not sure about the instrument you will use according to what is necessary for this.
dou feu	The first line "dou feu
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The heads of the shoulders either fall due to denseness, or due to hardness.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have cured the corrosion caused by the medicine, and it does not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the league or where the corrosion comes, if the malady is caused by death or by malice, which is greater, of the defect of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	When the signs appear that the limb becomes black, if it seems to be from burning heat, and then after turning black, it spreads to all parts of the member, causing corrosion.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you feel intense pain, and it is due to the impact of certain beasts' venoms, like that of a sea scorpion and wasp, and the corrosion is at the tip of the member, and it does not come out easily with your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes out easily with your hand, if the puncture is at the joint, if the corrosion does not come out easily from the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	If it comes to the arm, if the shoulder hurts.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	If it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no way to save it except for the amount of its courage.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And so, when the corrosion comes or pain.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes in the first joint, if the shoulder is after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	If it comes with pain, if the shoulder has all the courage.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it goes up the leg, if the shoulder is at the joint of the thigh.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	If it comes from the thigh, if there is no other way but to kill the patient.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	1. And the way to cope with or soothe the member is if you tie it off and cut away some of the members on one side, and others on the other side, and then stretch out the cord that is between the two members at a wide spacing, as long as the bone is discovered.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	2. Then the relief or soothe, and use of cloth, if it does not touch the healthy skin, and go to the surgeon for another wound and gangrene.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	3. And if the evacuation of blood comes when you work, if you cauterize the skin hastily, or if you put on any restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, then tie the affected limb with a flexible bandage, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened in my home in short:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	it happened to me a blackness that seemed to be burning, and this corrosion came first in my little child's poop, so it consumed the whole of it.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when I saw the corrosion, if it could cover the child's poop, and it was healthy:
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and later when I returned with the corrosion or feces from the hand, and it came to me, and I did some things reflective after the purification of the corrosion, and it could not stop the corrosions:
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	I will try to pass my hand over it, and I do not expect any effect from the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I doubted that if I cut my hand, it would not bleed because the strength of his arm was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	He then desperately returned to his land and managed to close his hand, and he was saved.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	I did not have this story to tell because it is another matter, and it is their craft.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No one has ever had an aposteme in the wild boar, and it takes as long as it makes a great assembly of arrows.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then they are torn apart and pierced, and with a jump the bowels are emptied, and the patient is relieved of his pain, just as some slaves.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin that is covered is as soft as I plucked off hairs, and does not reach the bone or nerve, and such disease if called "healthy", but is actually called "fissure".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it reaches the bone, then it is called "fissure".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the skin if it is that you cut through completely, and at the same time when it is as soft as I plucked off hairs, just like some hairs.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And do not let it remain for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you are engaged and the hair is growing, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the hair is long, then the cure is to curl it:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look at if the breasts are large, and the smell of the wound is unpleasant, therefore curl the breast with Egyptian medicine that has been made in this way:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take ashes, oil, and turpentine, and mix them together, then place the mixture in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey:
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	Then take this according to your need, and make it in the form of an ointment and honey, and cleanse the face, and draw out the pustule.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine on for two hours, then draw it out by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this as many times as the breast is swollen and the pus has stopped.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And never use an ointment of smoke until this medicine is present, and if you have ash from grape vine, and pour hot water over it, then let it drip, and when you see that the breast is well-swollen, cleanse it with the ointment.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot bear it, and the Egyptian medicine does not quell it with fire, then the poultice of fire and honey should be applied, or there should be a little bleeding.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	Or you poultice with honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the wound aerated.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well purified, if the poultice made with what is most suitable for the wound is applied, and it is not too hot, and they make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	If you choose to cauterize with some medicines and ointments, which I have mentioned the properties or treatment of the ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the wound is small, and the cautery does not enter, then enlarge the opening with a iron pin, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is smeared;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too large, then the cost and it leaves only the head or the cautery can enter, and if the wound that oozes blood is above, then the cup or more below the head than it is;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the belly is empty, if it is not left alone to rest.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you do not hold your breath in such a way that the belly does not rise to the lowest part of the body where it is, because when the belly is empty, if it is not left alone to rest and you do not hold your breath in such a way that it appears in half the way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the belly rises lightly and does not leave any of the belly:
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to make it better for the patient and they are put on the limb that covers all of the patient:
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cop the forces in a place where the wound is not too large, and they are stretched out according to the amount of wounds, and it is placed on the healthy wound to align the belly, and do not overdo it that it becomes too loose afterwards once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one who is closest to the wound often overdoes it to stretch the belly, and checks what comes out of the belly, whether it's poison or too much or not enough, or undigested or digested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if it has gangrene or not, and when your medicine has been extended in some way and you see the nature of what jumps out of the healthy wound, if you check whether the breasts have already sprouted, and approach the health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then remove the dressing in the morning or at another time, and when you examine the wound, if you find a different layer, replace the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after the first year, it is known that the breasts will not lactate.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venomous serpents are located far from the long tenses, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For it has many methods of making incisions in its wounds, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if it is not digested, after a day, you may see that the nipples are hard.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the nipples are not digested, and they become hard, if you use wet medicines in substance and dry ones in virtue, as an ointment is defined, because it has a great part of sulfur, and this is the rear medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	1. Take defattening ointment, and apply it with rose oil, and the ash of white wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use;	2. Then preserve and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	3. And when defattening is made, and the honey is cooked, if the ointment is not present, or you take a knife and aloe and incense, and the broth, and the powder when it is in the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	4. And then apply the dressing, and it is kept in the breast, and never once does an aristocrat administer it, and roots of the blue lily, which is also like flour and cinnamon;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	1. Cut the, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	2. If the wound is long, and not cured by this cure, then you should know that the corruption has become established, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	3. If the cure of the fistula cure is as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	4. Paralysis is an abscess that often occurs due to the swelling of the thumb or little finger of the hand, or by chance in other fingers.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	5. And when it is inflamed, and not taken care of, if it comes to an abscess, and runs and gets worse until it reaches the root of the thumb, or by chance it reaches all the way.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	When the corrosion reaches the bone, as soon as pain sets in, and the head of the shoulder becomes swollen, and the color changes.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cover the whole excess that is cut off from the finger, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is great help when the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the joint is pressed, and it starts to prickle, and the pain increases, and you must remove the part of the joint that points the bone, and cut it high, and apply a little bit of the char subtlety and lightly, and put on the remaining part of the joint with medicines that are burning and corrosive to heal everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	If corrosion reaches the bone, if it pierces and tears, for as long as the bone corrupts and is, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If you see the bone corrupting, if it pierces and tears as said before, then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	If it is frozen, cut it off, and if it feels great pain, then it is necessary to first treat it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the toenail as thin as possible when cutting across, and make sure the cut does not reach the quick, for the nail will cause great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If something is found, then put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the shoulder
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The shoulder dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is quite common, and often it does not move, and never unglues, and no one is born with this in any of us, or the birth is in none of our ancestors.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	That which does not occur in any other part of the body, and that which is found at the dislocated joint, may be stationary by chance.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is lame is such that it is lighter, in a certain way.
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The size of the lameness is such that it is like the root of a wide splint.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	That which is found in the root of the joint is such that it is difficult to cure.
si te tien dou coper.	If you hold your breath tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the event that you have to remove it from the back, if possible, first cover the hole with a piece of cloth suitable for this, then close the bone as much as possible.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The causes of these wounds come from birth, or from wounds, or from burning, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If the wound covers your breathing, then it must be repaired according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or cloth pieces polished with oil rose, which do not stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two soft pieces of linen, until it does not stick, as we have experienced.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When the patient feels no pain with their hand, it means that the treatment is effective.
des vils	Of warts.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The eyes are large and swollen full of melancholic superfluities, which come to more and more members.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more come in the legs of those who go to pray and work and bear, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, it is necessary that you do not administer any purging of colic, and then the proper dose of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure of iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	1. It is on the copper, and draws out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And if you wish to tie the vein, take all force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, heat the leg of a hot fire until it is thick and without being subtle, then stretch the leg gently towards the mid-thigh area of the groin.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then, tie the vein in I, II, or III with a large size, then loosen and pull out the dark blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as you can without causing too much pain for the patient's wounded leg.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	Then the patient is ordered to paint their skin with black ink.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And the evacuation and cleansing begin again when the veins are clear, and it is shown to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The inflammation of the wound is caused in this way:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the patient's leg if it has hair, then wash it with water, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red, and dilate the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you don't have any water, then heat the leg with fire, and then cut the vein at the top of the thigh or in the arch of the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then apply the leather to the wound, and scorch the wound in every part, as it becomes visible upon being touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it appears red and black, and when it enters or the leather seems as if it were a gauze bandage.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then remove the glue, as soon as it is softened by the leather, and then press it lightly on the wound, and then cover it with another piece of leather, and then stitch it in three places.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scorch the leather over the wound as it becomes visible, and then glue it to the leather as you have done, and then cover it with another piece of leather, as you have done previously.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then comes another size, or several like it, then the gentle one, and the cop on the second size;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then the extraction of size by size, as it is all firm, then the cop;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you do not pull it out and lift it, if a needle pierces all the way through to the other end, and you sew and stitch, and pull out some thread, and turn your hand over and over again until it is done;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep it from dislocating, for if it dislocates, then it cannot be pulled out or lifted, and it harms the shoulder;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have treated it all, if you put on the leeway of the wound with fine-haired wool soaked in wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and keep it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the eye is closed and swollen and covered over, and it is not straight as we have said, but if you cut it wrongly, do not cover it, but close it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and cut it as we have described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron that is used to close the eye if it is curved, and does not cut too much, so as not to cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is a large beak, because if it were subtle, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is surrounded by legs, hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and the earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it grows in another part than on the legs, and this comes from exudation of the hide, if it comes from the den of the snake and turns, surrounded between hide and char;
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	When the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes color, and the vein begins to bleed excessively, as if it were a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head is dislocated, if you wrap it around a piece of flesh from one and a half to two and a half inches long, and the nose, and leave the flesh on the leg, and all times when it is not deformed, if you wrap around the flesh and the nose;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	If the dislocation is too far out, so that a part of it is left outside and wrapped around the remaining limb, and it is not covered all the way to its root, then it will cause further problems.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cover it, it will re-enter the body, causing abscesses and pus to form, and serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is important that it is treated promptly and thoroughly, and nothing or any part remains.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And there has never been a vein that did not become treated with your hands, whether it was X or Y, and some came to me who had X hands, and when you cover it, if it blisters or becomes infected, and the wound pains, then everything will heal.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	1. And let the matter that is dense be seen, and the patient is given foodless medicines by the physician without any food, then the cure is done as they have with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	1. And never once is the vein hands wet, and at the same time when it opens in the joint or the other joint, and it comes out with a cough, and which falls out;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	1. cure the patient as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	2. Those that are born between leather and hide
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	1. This disease is called in our land "beef disease," because it often occurs in cows, and is a sharp pain that goes from the skin to the bone, and goes up and down the entire body, and is felt well at the member with the other member, until the skin or flesh is torn, and falls out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by excessive food of certain humors, if they come towards and are swallowed by worms and parasites and ascarids or the stomach.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts their malevolence, for when it goes through the course, it rises to the head, and comes to the oil, by chance enters, and destroys the oil.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	when you see it being cured and drawn, if not able to be done when it will.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if it is necessary that you cut the bone and remove it, then sew it up and draw it out, and if it is placed in the fire-cauterized, as long as it burns.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the most serious consequences that can occur if it is cut, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming towards the oil, then quickly pull away from it, then cut off the tip, and pull out the needle.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the cautery of dissolution of drug solutions for the human body, and to avoid foods that cause indigestion.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from winding.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "wakiri" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to no part of the body, and spreads from one part to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what you say.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to attend to a woman in labor, and I saw her arms, and I saw a small knot in the vein of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and then, I saw it rise up as quickly as a snake to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as if it were live silver when it cuts through flesh.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain left that shoulder, and it turned into the shoulder, and then a little later, it spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she dislocated her shoulder, just as I see it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvel at how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wished for this disease to occur in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Everyone, I want to ensure that the joint does not move with pain from one place to another, but I do not want to force it, if I see it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	I thought it was because the woman had tight clothing, and the veins were exposed, and because that constraint appeared;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it did not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist clothing and veins restored;
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see the cure for this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it opens as we have said, if the ligament and the joint are tightened, and then hold it until that constraint in the knee is over;
et cauterize le leu;	And cauterize the joint.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of this which causes the ventrites, if like pills of slippery elm and pills of sassafras, and similar things.
des saiettes	The text you provided does not contain the sentence
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Saiettes are various, according to their appearances and according to the hardness of the bones they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is if they have sharp points, and small, and hairy, and soft.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those that have two angles, and of those that have tails, and of those where there are parts.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And the one which does not cause pain in any member if it causes pain in two ways.
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Or if it causes pain in the principal member, like the head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she does not move at all in any of these limbs, and the sign of death appears, which I will tell you later, you will see.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary to remove this arrow, as death follows in many other positions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when you see that this sign does not appear, and the arrow is not in front, then pull it out, and treat the wound;
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of fever comes when the arrow pierces the bone and shoots out of the socket, and the part where it was inserted is affected by scotomie, sode, esvertin, roujor of the eyes, enflammation and roujor of the tongue, spasme and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of the cole;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And by chance, it lacks noses or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And by chance, the word and voice are lacking.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And a white wound-like leap resembling a horse's neck, and such a jump like a horse's neck.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And this is the sign that appears, if you hold the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it is pulled out or left in is that it is close to the left cheek, and it seems as if it was stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance, the arrow is also silent as the horse's neck, and with a dark wound, and cold and cold water comes, and the patient suffers.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When there is no doubt that the patient has died.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the eye that has not been opened is that there are no signs of swelling around the wound, and the throat is pale, and the patient's face is pale, and they sigh high and cry out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the covering of the piss, then it is loose the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and great pain and suffering and gasping.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and they move all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the shoulder bone is dislocated in the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound, nothing of the undigested meat remains.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the shoulder bone is dislocated in the stomach, and it jumps point-blank through the small intestine, if there is no hope for cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels great pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	When the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and chest and shoulder and arm and spine and back and ribs and muscles and legs, are safe according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the artery is in the shoulder or the wound, and it is not visible, as I will tell you if I know, because you are doing this.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one man a arrow in the root of the thigh.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and from another side, I removed the fat of the ear, and it was cured without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And there was a game of an arrow that fell into the grease of the oil of ozone and the paper of ozone, and the arrow was reponed, and could not be reached beyond the point towards the front, and it was the arrow very long like a Turkish bow, at all I made it light in weight for the ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	I made the joint healthy, and no accidents happened when I moved it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And there was an arrow in the neck of a horse, and it was the Arabian arrow with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I knew the barbs, and very subtle when I translated it, and the horse was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And there was a wound on the man, which he thought was in his stomach or chest, and he thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then it had been XXX days, and if it had not been in its place.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I opened the wound, I dressed it, and it healed, and there was no accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if a man had a wound on his chest or back, and it was infected.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the wound did not heal, and it did not adjust its natural positions, and it was not found in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if another man had a wound on his face, and it was infected.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	The patient will suffer greatly before the dislocation is treated.
et mout d’autres semblans.	Other similar cases may occur.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And there was an arrowhead in the thigh of the king's son, who had it for a long time and it was slightly inclined to the left side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	The arrowhead was completely removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for the treatment after it had been stuck for three years.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very tightly closed.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried everything subtly to find it, but I did not feel it.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a sharp and painful sensation in his left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead I had put in his throat, because he did not gag.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I saw it was from an arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I placed the plaster on my hands, and dressed the wound on the right side, and it took a long time for the patient to feel the arrowhead enter his flesh.
et il le me dist.	And he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied the poultice of the corrosive medicine on my hands, and it was covered with a layer of plaster, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow that was stuck in the flesh.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I dressed the wound with the poultice of the corrosive medicine on the overturned plaster, and as the head of the arrow became visible to me.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it takes well to the end in four months, and then the wound is healed if I have anchored the nails with my hands on both sides, and it cannot be undone.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I will continue to refine and engineer ways of extraction, as long as I have the nails well made, according to how the form will be in the end of this chapter, as I heal and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctors judge that the cartilage cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	Therefore, I will restore it, and the wound was soothed, and the patient's health was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or I said the quality of extracting some arrows, if you apply your cure to what I will say, because the books cannot fully describe it;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the skilled masters make good use of many small things, and of what is present and lacking, nine operations, and a variety of instruments, in the descent of things that are drawn in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows do not come from the limbs or they are not cut off in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the arm or they enter, or by another part.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which is cut off by the arm or it enters, is an arrow that has been inserted into the flesh, and it will never be cut off again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	If she does not leap now, if she leaves it as it is, and it becomes entangled in the hair, and the result is the injury.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if she becomes stuck in the bone, and she cannot move, if she leaves it alone for no reason, and moves each joint;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then she jumps, and if she does not jump now, if it is not cut deeply enough, as long as the bone is sharp, and then it will be difficult to remove;
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the shoulder, and it will be near one of the bellies of the shoulder, and some of the accidents I have mentioned to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If it is not burned, but left as it is until it grows even after some days, it is because the shaft comes out and that causes death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the dislocation is not due to the bone alone, and does not cause pain, and there have been no previous accidents, then it is not a serious matter.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it becomes very thick and cannot be inserted further, if you administer tarters otherwise, as I have said to you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the head as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead is reset in the shoulder, and one cannot see it, if they want to try everything.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, if there is no suitable instrument available.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you do not press for the wound's relief and for the shaft's removal, if it does not hurt as much as the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	When you pull the arrow out, and if it has ears (earplugs) that hold on, then break or crush the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	Even if you don't break the arrow, pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you do not manage to do it once, if the patient is still resistant until the end, then pull out, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	If the dislocation occurs against the joint, and you ignore what we have said about the cure in this chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And you are wounded by the incision of the nerve and vein, and put your hand on it when you pull out the arrow more firmly, whether slowly or quickly, or firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And place the patient according to the form it was in when the arrow struck, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you do not, then follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that came from another part, or it opened no thing of his, or the skin is shrunk in some place if you see or feel it:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Then measure according to size, as long as the thorns can take hold, and then extract:
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it does not come now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you turn your round hand around as it enters the bone, until it expands the bone, then it will exit.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it and then resume the extraction as soon as it comes:
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is from the arrowhead and is stuck, it is cut at all strokes.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is stuck, and you see the instrument being administered, if it is an instrument with sharp points, then the arrowhead enters the instrument's hair;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then cut further, and if the arrowhead is hair, if it cuts the instrument at the tip entering, to lighten the extraction;
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	When the arrowhead is inserted, if it reaches the entire cavity or the venomous substance, then you must first treat the wound as best as possible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the belly, or in the stomach, or in the chest, and it is protruding, then you cover it with a cloth, it holds;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and keep the vein and the nerve, then extract, then clean the wound, it is easier.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment as soon as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the arrows' barbs that are used to extract arrows resembles a beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are several ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the abscess.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The pointed end of the hair is similar to the beak of a sparrow, to be inserted at the tip of the arrowhead, in the same way as this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tails to insert and to pick is similar to this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	veins that are healthy are XXXI, but if there is a headache of XVI, it means:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	two bats that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbs".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two wounds that are in the two hairs, which are called "aspirations
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the wound that is in the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the wound that is at the top of the head.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two gouges that are out of col.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the wounds that are in the lips of those that are out of the mouth, and these are the wounds that are called "augeherich".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two wounds that are cut into the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The wounds that are usually found in one arm are five.
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the temporal wound, which is on the left side of the chest, and it is called the "temporal wound" by the people.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	The head of the shoulder is called "fast" and is composed of thecephalic and basilar parts, and they call it the "bone of the shoulder".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And if the basilar part is on the west side, and they call it the "shoulder bone", and it is under the fornix, and it is the one that is easily accessible, which is open clearly under the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the savette is the vein that is between the auricular and anal, and if it rains.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	And in the leg, and at the ankle, there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is the corbier of the right ankle, and the second one is the suture at the left ankle.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	The vein that is called "nestle" is located in the ankle of the other leg.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	In the other leg, there are three veins different from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The sinus of the veins that are after the ears can be helped by old catheters and drains.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the quality of the sinus is, as I say, and it is that you remove the head of the patient, and wipe the foot or the veins are of a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then the patient's throat becomes red, as long as the veins are visible behind the ears and the two dependent on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	1. If you feel pain in your shoulder, and if you sense weakness in your arm, then seek help.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	2. Then take the scalpel, and cut through the vein as close to the bone as possible, then gently hold the vein with your entire hand until it bleeds well, and then make sure the blood flows freely until you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	3. Then stretch and hold it, as long as it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	4. And I have already said the incision and fire cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	5. The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if they are old and hard, and if they have been blocked, and if they have been narrowed, and if the tears flow from them;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and you can judge its quality as being quite healthy if I say so:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient pulls on his chest, until the veins open widely.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and he feels the pain in his ribs, and then signs of enchantment.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then gently feel the pulse at the top of your ribs, and cut the thread below, and gently pull up the vein and the skin, as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to remove enough blood according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then relax the patient, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then the ligature is formed and left as long as it remains healthy.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of their strength and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the health of the cranial bone, and it is affected by ancient diseases of the face, migration, and wounds.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And if the patient is in pain when the surgeon strains his neck while drawing the vein, as long as the vein is exposed.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "forceps," whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and hold it firmly with your hand or another object, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the cloth at the neck, and hold the vein until it is safe and never once with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Indeed, only the fire should be too large.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the safe way is to cross it, because the ointment is near, and by chance the fire may be too hot when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The safe way for the two veins that are in the two arms is to help the patient with the pain, and the bend, and the wound, and the urine in the oil, and many diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and assess the quality of their health if it is that the patient strains his neck by twisting any joint, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy one, and if the patient has a long, narrow neck, because there is no cartilage.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the neck is slender, by chance if it is broken.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make a deep incision, as much as you can, and then cut the skin, and it heals well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The vein of the healthy one is not weak if it is long and slender, and it does not cause pain or disease in the face, as does inflammation and rash that comes with age.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of the wound is considered to be good if the patient complains of pain in his chest, then tighten his neck in your left hand, and take a thin tweezer, and scratch off the eyelid in the eye socket that is between the two eyes, because the wound does not open well, and it will now start to close.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not push it too far, and close the wound according to your need, then let it rest one night, as it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This is the form of the tweezer.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	If the wounds of the two eyes help in the removal of the hair, and at the beginning of combing, and for many diseases, and empetigines, and corrosions, and herpes, and estiomenes.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and assess the quality of the health if it is that the patient strains his neck to one side or the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and if the master is standing at the side of the patient's shoulder, and the patient is lying down, then the vein is long, then draw out a little blood, as much as possible;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then draw out another part in the other vein, then separate the limbs, and strain the veins gently, so that the patient does not suffer;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until the morning, if the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the teeth of the lips is aided in the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, and cracks in the lips, and toothache and tooth loss.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of health is determined if it is necessary to make the patient stand before you, and tighten their neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the eye, and look at them, of which one is on the left and the other on the right, and they are identified by their blackness, and by the fact that they have thin black lines.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Check one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then check the largest of each part, and do the same for all the eyes that are similar, because it is a different way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healthy tongue, the language
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are open and long if helped after the healing of the head, and it is to the throat's scarcity, and there are diseases of the eyes, and there are diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the health if it is that the patient suffers when the medicine is placed between one's hands in front of the sun, and the tongue is made to lie, and looks at each side of a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	and the health is cured, and do not let it be too much, for it is the veins.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins that are commonly cured are healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	1. If you prick it with your fingers, it will burn like fire, as sharp as a knife, and is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	2. And they are wide and subtle according to the widening and thinning of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is such that it is named when it is first made, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	3. It has skill for opening flat veins with large clots of thick blood, and containing large clots and trouble.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	4. And it is the form of the sharp olive-colored flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more suitable for the subtle veins, and it is safer for the subtle veins, or if there is subtle blood clotting.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	5. The health of the basilican vein, which is one of these veins, if helped with these diseases that are so bad for the throat, neck, chest, and stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The translation of the given line is: "And it is necessary for the healer to cleanse the wound and apply an antiseptic.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	The translation of the given line is: "And if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	The translation of the given line is: "And it should not be pricked by the flame, but rather cut with a sharp blade.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	The translation of the given line is: "And if the umbilicus does not open clearly, then it is necessary to pull on it and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	The translation of the given line is: "Or you want no rain on it, or you cleanse the vein with the blood from your arm.
elle apert manifestement;	She opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cautery is applied to the fire, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the joint of the arm become swollen, then it is necessary that you hold the arm firmly, and touch the joint as much as you can feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then signs for the joint to swell, and then hold the arm firmly, and cauterize the vein with fire.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to hurt the artery when you see the joint swell, because it is the artery.
eschui la donques.	So do.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see coming out from above like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, then you should know that it is not from the artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Haste to you, and place your hand on the bone for a long time, then remove your hand without straining it, which has happened many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Tie your arm, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient's shoulder.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be still, and do not move until you are calm.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if you are not straining it, and it does not work, and the doctor is not present, then the artery may open, as the head of the arrow returns.
et estainche li sans.	And do not strain it further.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a scalpel, and make it sharp, and take one of the halves and place it well against the other side.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If it is not stained, it is well.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it is not cleansed, if the cure involves powders that stain blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the staining is not usually seen in other dispositions due to the small wound of the wound, and the pain of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein is in good condition if it can handle the flow of blood from the head and the wound, because it is composed of basilar and cerebral matter, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the patient to cut the nerve that is affected, and if it is not too long, and it trueves the nerve, and it swells and becomes unhealthy, and by chance it cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	The shoulder bone is frequently opened, and if it does not open on its own due to its subtlety, then you should use the old instrument to open it.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	You should remove the shoulder bone from your pain.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is blood between the two veins, if it is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The head aid if it helps, that it draws blood from the chief, and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And you should help it by pressing on the olive or mint flame, because it is the safest of all wounds, because it does not harm the bone or the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	In short, you should use a lighter instrument, and do not hurt anything the first time, and resume.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they read it for the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about health, if it is true that health is not a luxury but a means of keeping healthy and avoiding diseases coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the health be made in one of the three veins that are either free:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	It is to know, cephalic, faste, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it is necessary to keep healthy at the beginning of prayers, and in dives and in swimming after having eaten, when the sign of fullness appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And it should be done on the first day or the second, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The one who is maintained in good health does not have a specific disease, but when it comes to eating or drinking, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary for children of twelve years old to be more healthy, nor for women who are only four months pregnant.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nese should not be made healthier than those who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And if some appear to be healthier, in whatever way that may be, if they cause the small intestine of a light clyster to become inflamed, if there are many feces retained, then the vagina does not have the small intestine as unnecessary and harmful members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	1. No meat that is too fat or too lean, and no yeast, whether it is or not, and no drugs.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	2. And if it is after a passionate attack of colic, and vomiting, and disorientation of the stomach, and frequent urination in women, and travel, and awakening and dining, and all the virtue, or by something of the arm or deep wound;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	3. Then refine the humors, if it is not too large, by meat and drink and medicines, if you can afford it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	4. Then enter or bathe, nothing will help, by refining the humor, and make yourself healthy from the vein to the third part, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep that day of work, and pain, and pleasure, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be close and attentive, and keep the healthier ones higher than those we consider healthy, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently draw the limb away, for if it is too swollen or small, it cannot be corrected without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the shoulder with hands until the veins throb and are felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then apply the healthier oil to a small amount of oil, then place your left hand on that vein on the shoulder as far as it can go without causing pain, so that the vein does not break or weaken from injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that run like strings in the healthier ones, and if they are many like those of wind, then when one is placed over the fire, if it withdraws from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it opens the vein, then there is too much swelling in the wound, because then it is necessary that the healthier ones are informed about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if not, then it resumes a little later in the same place or suddenly, if it is not bent.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	If it is found to be shortened, and the patient becomes anxious, allow it to remain for one or two days, and do not tie the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	By chance, aphthae (canker sores) appear on the tongue.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter water or bath, and if it pleases, restart the cure.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the wound is gnawed, or it is not cut subtly and you doubt that there is as much blood as you see, then be afraid of that wound yourself in all fairness.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And the wound does not heal quickly, unless the patient is shortened.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For there are often times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the skin swell, if you do not rekindle the health, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the corset of the blood, and makes it dry in this part of the skin that the oil is on.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and keep oiling the skin as often as you heal the wounds, because it strengthens the course of the blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this same thing helps to relieve and strengthen the limb that is oiled.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you are careful not to spread it too much when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If there are large abscesses that often recur, and at the same time the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and wet a soft sponge in cold water and wrap it around the leg, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no swelling or darkness or discoloration at the leg after a few days, then you should not be concerned.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, do not apply any aloe or rind of milk of almonds, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times there have been cases of gangrene and appearance in the health of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Then place your hand on it, and if the limb is painful under the pressure of your hand, that is the appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	However, do not put anything on it other than what we have said, for by chance in the cut without damaging the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but apply it dry to strengthen the limb, then continue with another treatment until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	2. And apply to every pain according to its quantity of virtue and color of the poison.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it becomes black, do not let it stay out as long as it is red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it get big, do not let it stay out as long as it is subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If it is too hot, then let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is good for the one who is in pain and in need of extraction, and has the skill of extracting blood, then widen the wound more, and make the flames wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the weak, I do the opposite, and it is healthier to cut often and not to prick, and it should be done with a sharp blade.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this way of healing is saved from the spread of blood and the strengthening of the nerve, and it is better that the long wound does not become wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose heart needs healing, it is good to give a thin bread dough in the juice of green apples.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is sweating, if three drops of blood are drawn or four If it is of cold complexion, if before the sick person eats well-milled flour mixed with honey, or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-odored syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he feels better after vomiting, after the evacuation of blood, it is necessary that he drinks charbroiled honey and a subtle scented honey, and uses other things as we have said in the division or chapter of sincope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he sees his arm swelling again, and becoming more so, if it comes to that, when he is overcome by great weakness, which he gains a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he sees his arm swelling again after the first time it was weak, and he feels strong, if he is strong seven hours after the first time he was weak, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he feels strong from another part, if he should become stronger on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has a thirst for blood that is already sweating, which brings on fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it comes to draw large amounts of blood, and clean the wound as much as possible.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then since you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the wound as soon as it is healthy, so that the death does not come from the wound of the pimple, and this happens many times, when the healthier ones are neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	When you see the arm slip from its place, and make it bleed the second time, and the wound is closed, then you must press on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If the arm is swollen, extend it gently, as this would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it remain until the second time it has swelled.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you do not touch the point of the flame, as long as the part that is frozen does not bleed from the vein until it has bled, and then put on wet bandages and return to fire, and gently press on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is inflamed, and it is not held steady, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If it is necessary to draw the blood twice, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in the other hand.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The arm is healthy because the vein of the shoulder is not affected by the dislocation.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to heal if the patient's hand is burned with hot water, as long as the redness remains.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it is tied loosely, if the vein appears well, then the proper way to do it is to make a small incision, not too wide and not too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the wound be wide, and be well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, then put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood flowing until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if this is not enough, then do not put the hand in hot water again, because it will be more inserted than before.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The soreness of this wound is safer than all others, as it has not been pierced or cut.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the saved hand is such that it can cure all stomach ailments, and this is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and pour hot water over it as long as the vein is not visible, if possible.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you can cross it, and cover it all over, if it does not hurt at all.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not make it too hot, because the flesh is dry and without warmth, and then put the hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated enough blood as is necessary for your skill, if you put the vein oil and seal it firmly, and then do the same to each vain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient with the hand on the left side is suitable for treating mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the gallbladder is suitable for treating all diseases that are poor in the chest, such as diseases of the lungs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the arms and legs, and old wounds, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its cure if it is that the patient's hand is bathed in hot water and the vein is cleaned as much as possible, and the joint is rubbed around the wound.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	If the vein is near the ankle, and there are many wounds from rain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	If the wound is small or large, or near the ankle, it is worth considering.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you consider the wound, if there are nerves that are exposed, and the pain is severe, as well as crawling;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and the old scars should be considered.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you cannot remove it, then put your hand in cold water, and let the wound dry well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the pain worsens the first time, but returns in a second pore, because the lesion is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and I will make a poultice of the other ankle.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The pain in the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the foot, and its cure is the pain in the knee, when it is full of blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of its health if it is that the patient enters or bathes, and strains the ankle IV times in twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, if the healthy person is in all ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worth copying if the patient is well, for the leech is safe, and it is replied to by human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not copy, if the healthy person has no one who opens or does not open, and goes to the small toe, and you wear out the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And make so much evacuation of blood that you see, and then let go of the ligament, and put on cotton and strain.
ele est maintenant sanee.	The patient is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of causes of birth
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuum pumps are made of horn, or iron, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and vacuum is created in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this vacuum is created by cutting in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is at full heat, or by heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and the vacuum created by cutting and extracting blood is made in twelve hours of the sun's course, with some being all at once.
et li autres est emmi le col;	And the other is left in place.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	And two more in the other cheek.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And the suction of the mouth;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	And the suction of the other two shoulder blades;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the suction of the groins;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	And the suctions of the inside of the arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And the suctions of the legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And the suctions of the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And the suction does not treat any blood, for it is scattered throughout the body, and therefore there are no veins that are not affected, as we do with wounds;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And only then is it necessary that she be anesthetized, without any fire or sensation of fire, in no disease that comes from overload, as long as the heart is dry;
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessary for diseases, or due to habits, if the midwife attends every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and also in every ten;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they have to assist at childbirth, have heavy heads.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And if there are those who, when they are full and have a fever in their face, in their head, and in their neck, and are pale;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who have a chill in their mouth, their tongue has swollen, and they spit out blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are those who feel weak, see signs of fever, cold, and other symptoms.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we saw these signs, and at the same time when the month was over, we commanded them to fast for three hours after noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The patient with the infected eye seeks help for the pain caused by the eyes watering and the swelling... only after all the pus has been drained.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	If the ventilation is in the head of the infected eye, and it is only used by those with a cold complexion or those who have been crying, as this can cause significant harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	Therefore, only the watchman should use ventilation, and those who have or are suffering from head colds.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often get better, if they become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the ventouse a little further down due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation in the neck of the infected eye and the base of the skull is used for relief from pain, and to reduce swelling, redness, and inflammation.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The patient is instructed to bind it loosely, as it tends to tighten too much and cause discomfort in the stomach or chest and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The patient suffers from chest pain and shortness of breath, which worsens with exertion, causing the heart to palpitate and the jaw to ache, and leading to toothaches. It is an indication of the disease of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	It is recommended that you instruct the patient to express his hand when putting on the bandage, so as not to cut the artery and cause hemorrhaging.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The patient experiences pain in the neck if it is caused by a disease of the mouth, oral corruption, and similar diseases that affect the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And it is in the gums of the second lower lip.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are worth the disease that comes from chlor and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventricles of the throat are worth as much as the third veins of the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And command the patient not to do too much, for his lung is empty of air and knows how to compress and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The ventilator that is in the chest is worth as much as the foundation of the body, and has diseases, and it must be large and deep, with a good ability to breathe.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if it is too subtle, it will break.
et i fai grans plaies.	I cause great pain.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The abdominal pounds are healthy when they open widely, for they attract blood from the entire body, and alleviate old pain from menstruation, childbirth, and bladder issues, and relax the muscles.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	They are in the legs of the II soles and the II heels, and they make the body weak after long use, and cause pain in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to set the abdominal pound is to first empty it, and then continue until you see the redness and swelling, and the appearance of the bruise.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then, firmly place the forceps, and prepare in the position of the corsets, as some have such large shoulders and narrow chests.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is recommended to wound once only, and make wide cuts, and a small amount.
et suce legierement.	and gently lick.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if it is not thin, if it is wounded twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time by making the vein thinner for the large amount of blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it is not very swift, if it is wounded a third time:
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we want to draw out small veins frequently, we only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish to draw blood, if we often return.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if we wish to draw blood, if we often return; and if it is not swift, then it is finished if the vein is perceived to be sore, and those who have thick skin and are hard, and who have large pores, you should cleanse the handles of the oily, dissolving lamps.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in this manner, of olive oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of the seed oil of cucumber.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in this way, of ivy oil, or of lily oil, or of chamomile, or other such likeness.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take warm oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and apply it.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is dry and large pores, it is not recommended to apply oil, but it is recommended to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or violet water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if the mouth is dry, if it rises from honey, or rose water, and summer, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive abundance rise from wine vials, or of ague of ailments, or of decoction of anet or of chamomile, or of other such things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And they do not become more healthier by ventouche before the bath but after the bath an hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And they do not sleep much after ventouche, and they become weary when they should be ventouched and when they are ventouched;
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And if those who are healthy are cooled, and if without them they are too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it happens that they crave cold things, such as pomes grenates and endives and laitues at the dairy, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And remove pus, and charred flesh, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, if they suck honey syrup and sweet wine that is between wet and dry, and remove pus and small pieces of skin and pimples, and
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and when it starts to rain, if it must drink more than water.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give some men no time of trial or massage before the wind, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And make them subtle, but only those who are thirsty should drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	1. The instruments that are put in to cause pain are those that are put into the liver, and the stomach, and gout, and the intestines and bowels and veins and bones, for this member does not suffer from external injury, and it is only caused by drawing blood from one part to another, as we do with the breasts when they are sick.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	2. to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we do with the breasts when we take out the abscess from the belly and the bowels to relieve the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	3. and to relieve the pain, when it is inflamed or pierced, if it is relieved by its own virtue attracting the inflammation, or if the piercing is separated from its limb.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	When the patient is placed on the stomach and the chest, and when it has been retained, these ventouses are administered empty by sucking only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And never have been administered hot fire, and never plained of cold decoction, as in such diseases that cause pains, and in this manner we fill the ventouse with warm water, or with cold water if it has been cooked with useful herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half palm of the hand, and it has one cost on the little puss, as if to poke an aguille, and it is of wax, so that it does not stick to the patient's member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in a certain environment, there is a way across iron or steel, using a wedge, and these are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the umbilical cords of children are not like thicknesses, and neither are they fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should one insert this umbilical cord into the member?
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the wedge of clay or grease, and insert the umbilical cord through the hole of the wedge that has been inserted into the wedge, so that it is clear at the end of the wedge and does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then it is placed on the member, and your wounds must be seen if we have said, so that if you see, if there is fever, and if you ventilate.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	Then apply the liniment as before, and often resume it, if you have skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the ventilated room, which is for the treatment of coughs and colds, there is no fever or cough, and it is not infected only when it is plain with a cold, and it is placed on the member only so much.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Wounds are not infected only when they are in the limbs where it is not possible to ventilate due to their small size, like the lips and genitals, and they look like these.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in the case of dislocation, if it is not treated promptly, and other similar cases.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of the user if it is that without water that are in soft drinks, if they are taken;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And they are given a nut in soft water, as long as they are not pregnant, and have no children in the belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then it is cleaned and dried, and then the limb is washed as much as it is red, and the wounds are dressed;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they will be flat and smooth, if it is the joint or can be dressed, it is put in, because this is after;
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the leg of ease, and then of pain, well, and then stretch it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if it feels too tight after the corset of the stays, if I am cold and wet, and put on, as long as they are not stretched.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the stays are multiplied, if you put on vitrol or gas, and similar things, as long as they are stretched.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or if you put on the leg half of picked walnuts, and leave them as they cool to the leg, it will now stretch.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more of these, if you take others.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	If the wounds do not take on the salve, if you rub the wound with warm oil or insert a needle as much as it does not hurt, and then put it on, and as they feel the heat, if they burn.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are smarting, if you sprinkle on a little aloe and silk, or charcoal, they will now burn.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	2. This is the beginning of the book of wounds.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	3. These cauteries are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are a restoration of wounds and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Tell them, that the leaf will make the patient's skin smart from this chapter, that they will never see any of the old books, nor letter will come out.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the science is neglected in our land, because I have never found any book.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and no one knows otherwise, for it is by the science of ancient books, or because I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and condensed at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the strangulations that are mistaken, as I have done in these two previous chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	1. It is therefore necessary that we say the introduction of this book, the words and chapters, and the surgeons understand their meaning, and they should pay attention to the truth, so that those who have experienced it and learned this noble art can teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or twisting occurs in no way, if you must first heal the patient on one side and the other, nothing else can help, just like how it is with wounds, or tumors, or galls.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	If the joint is not very tense, or too loose.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	If the joint is too loose, it is known as cold joints, and should not contain any fatty tissue, no thin charcuterie, and no excessive consumption of meat that fills the veins with blood, until you do not doubt aposteme chaut, nor expansion of matter in the member.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient's condition improves after using the treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient's meat that causes great swelling, or if it has viscosity, like wheat cooked in hot water, and tests, and pies, and pancakes made of wool, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the swelling decreases and the fracture is less soon.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you know that bones broken by fractures and decrepitude cannot be well restored or surged according to their nature by the care of the members, nor those who are too soft, like small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But there is no cure, first reset the broken bone and large fragments that are pulled out and join the limb together as much as possible, just as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not pull too hard on its work, and because it causes great pain from large meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	The treatise explains that there are various types of fractures, each with its own characteristics and causes.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	However, the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will explain all types of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that occur when falling, and others that result from being struck, similar to the size of a quill used for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	If a fracture is accompanied by a wound, it can be a small cut or nick.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to have his engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes to his memory in his head.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known the bone fracture by what causes it to be twisted, and wide open by defense, and some by pressure of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when it is not twisted and does not touch the toes, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may have knots, or roughness, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it with your hand alone, but apply the medicine that comes after, and then gently pull it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you suspect that the fracture will occur in the fall, and the two parts of the bone are separated, it is now necessary to align them as evenly as possible, without causing further injury.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the bone is set, and it does not cause any pain, as long as the pain is eased.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then you should align it gently and carefully, and suspect that the restoration of the bone is lighter than the restorations of other bones or if there are fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And then hold it steady until it is done.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	When there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is two parts, it is hands or foot, or in your hand it is some small limbs, or in the cords, or in one cord and in your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member in its natural position, if by the parts of the broken member they are out of place, then reset them with your fingers in the joint that you see, and make sure that by your effort there is no injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two heads of the bones as well as the best forms;
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And it feels good in the hand if it seems that it is not well done:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If the swelling improves nicely and is not strained too much, do not press as hard as those who cause it to come out through their abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is swollen, if the patient is careful not to move it too much, neither during the day nor at night, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And be well that the limb is firmly bandaged to ensure that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For if there is no pain, and it is not swollen, then it is necessary to put on clothing that does not cause any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep it straight, so that twisting does not come when you restore it.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It is known that the broken member can be different in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For it has many limbs, just like fingers and toes, and similar ones.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	if it is covered with flax and wool of a fineness and subtlety such as.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are thick, just like a knot and a leg.
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	if they are covered with a thick and hard linen, because the large linens wrap around the whole limb, and they are drawn equally from all parts, if it has no tension.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the hand is lightly tourniqueted with three or four turns around the member, and the hand is stretched a little for the entire length, then it goes to the end of the fracture and is stretched less than the fracture, which the fracture slightly moves away from the break;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and softens the ligament a little and a little, as you grip a large part of the healthy member, then take another ligament, and turn it rightwise over the broken member;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go back to the part opposite the fracture, and stretch it gently, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first lesson;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then insert the threads between the stitched lines of linen or drapery, as it is even, then tie them with silk and braid, and then put your well-made eyes on them, if there is no slippage or fraying.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is fraying or slippage, then put something calming for slippage on it, and that stops the fraying, and leaves no uneven parts.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then tighten your eyes, and be of one and a half inch wide, rough hemp, or fust that is used for nails, or rings of palm, and be like this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the piece that is placed on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and should also be long enough to fit the member of small or large size.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then pull on the strings as you did in the first session, then tie a thread around it, just like in the first session.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	The more it is stretched, the less it is.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is necessary that the thread be clean, not too thick nor too thin, and be made of linen thread.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the thread is too thick, it is like the works of the foxes who make their lashings of linen threads, and it is a great mistake, for the lashing cannot be equal if it is too fine, and only serves to have less space between each string.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is dislocated due to the hairs of the eyelids after plucking them in good health, if they make holes in the skin, or cause inflammation, if it does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the forceps, and the nail is broken, I will tell you the cure for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And he should not try to straighten all the broken limbs at once.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not proper to put on tight clothes that will afterwards cause pain after six or seven days, or according to your aposteme's strength.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And then the way of ancient plasters to restore breaks, dislocations, and torsions:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And is that you make a dough that holds within the walls of the mill, and knead with much beer, and make this confection, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore breaks in other positions, and even women and children, for it is not too hard or too wet.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Prepare a mixture of oak bark, linseed oil, and Arabic gum, and mulat; mix it with X parts of water.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mince the ingredients and aloe, mix it with X parts of water.
alechil VIIII З.;	Add aleochil in the mixture, X parts of water.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	Then make a powder, and mix with pork fat.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the complexion of the skull is hot, then use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Other method of plaster that is used:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mud and mix it with water, then let it dry for about 12 hours.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	grind and add aloe, then let it dry for about 79 hours.
acaice VI З.;	mix with ice for about 6 minutes.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	mix with arsenic (armenicum) for about 10 minutes, then boil well and cook with water or urine, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of plaster for joints and bones is to take the bones out of their sockets, soothe the pain, and make them fit, and the fractures heal.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take new gauze, mix it with oil and cooked butter, and put it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	2. These plasters do not repair anything, but they are useful for soothing abscesses and properly addressing bone pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to fracture that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Use dried figs, and dry earth pottery, break them together, and make a splint.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	4. Another plaster to repair the bone fracture and to help heal the abscess: take dried fig leaves and earth oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Use the root of valerian, chamomile, violets, flour of wheat, of each a part.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and boil, and mix with wine, and when the members are washed, mix with fresh coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster more forcefully than the first, when an abscess is coming out of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Use the roots of valerian, linseed, honey, honey, and violets and chamomile, of each a part.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And cut, and bind with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras states that no material is used to set a broken bone for restoration, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It appears that Galien suggests that when setting a broken bone for restoration, one should use dry things like cheese, mirrory aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to detect injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take raw and cooked oats, or wool from sheep, and glue, and cut them evenly, and bind, and then apply it and hold it in place.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then take a pouch afterward, and keep an eye on the patient's pain does not feel any pain, and does not move the bones of his arm.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not taken by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	If pain comes to the limb, or itching, if you touch it, and it swells, and now the plaster is loose.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and gently loosen it, and use wet seawater, and dip in cool water, and raise the swollen limb as much as the itching stops, and soothe the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then rest the limb for an hour, then put on a dry bandage, smooth with water or olive oil, and tie tightly until you are sure there is no sign of gangrene.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the swollen limb, and soothe the pain, then resume gently tying with a small piece of plaster, and a little emplasater, and do not strain it too much.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And gently as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the wound is bleeding, swollen, painful, and inflamed, and you have the skill to plaster and bandage, if it recurs, as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the member that we have said, if it does not slip after three days or four or seven or ten.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And never leaves it for twenty days, according to what we see, as long as the fracture is healing, and approaches the joint of the cart.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	However, the restraint is more than the first, and its flesh increases as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the shoulder drying more than it should, screams that no one can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	The first line of the text translates to: "When the fever rises, you must wash your face several times a day, regardless of the time.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	The second line translates to: "By this means, the swelling in the member is reduced, and the pain subsides, restoring the member to its natural state.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	The third line translates to: "This is unfortunate, and if it persists, I can only recommend rest and proper care.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounding
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	The fourth line translates to: "There are many types of wounds, and various shapes, and the causes are different.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	The fifth line translates to: "For there are wounds made by the impact of a spear, and they pierce the entire bone, just like a thorn or a nail.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For this reason, it is called this method of fracture "hair-cutting".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	The speckled bone is cut through by various senses, and this method of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And the wound from these two great or small fractures is.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is made by a thrust that is embedded, or cut, or by the edge of a pierce, or by the point after a pierce, or by other such means.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent wound, which approaches the skin that is exposed to the bone, or it is under the bone, and this is the injury or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is repaired in the bone is as fine as some needles, and is a small cut, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound that is made by cutting with a sharp object, or by piercing, or by some other means, and causes the piece of bone to enter, and it is called the "hotter" when they heat the hotters;
si entre li piere dedens.	If it enters the wound.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And there are more who have moist hair, like children's hair.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and come in all these ways of fracture that are lightly cut if like these;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak to it in its own language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let's examine all the ways of fractures by the methods used, and by the corrupted char that is used.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone, and rubs it with a cloth, if the dark fracture is not wide open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, keep a close eye on the patient's condition, and if you see no serious complications, such as vomiting, confusion, apathy, muscle relaxation, fever, and redness, and other symptoms that cannot be cured, seek medical attention.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you expect a cure to begin.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the bone comes first to you, and it is in your hand, if it is necessary to cut the bone before the fortieth day, then you must.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this way, if you have cut the bone before the ninth day, then the wound that we have mentioned will be corrupted and the accident will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture comes near the edge of the skin that the scar hides, then you must cut off the damaged part.
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if you burn the patient's hair as it grows, and cut along the bone in all ways you can, and along the shape of the wound more so than you can, and to reveal the bone, or to expose the muscle, and if you help with this that you can, and then fill the wound with oily powdered flax.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest as long as the inflammation is eased, and be assured of its correlation with blood.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then the bone begins to erode, and it is done according to two methods of incision:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one method is when you cut at the narrowed end, and it is formed like this:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then, a larger piece is cut than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is when you have many different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and you perform them lightly, so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and thick, then you must perforate it from the inside, otherwise, you should make holes with smaller drills, and do not let the point go further into the bone, and it must have a margin or a circle that does not allow the point to go further into the bone:
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you should have more of them if many people have this condition when their bone grows in their shoulder, if you have tried everything for your test.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And it is the form of the three ways of trying:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality of piercing into the broken bone is that you put one try on the bone and turn it as much as you can until you feel that the bone is perceived.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then I put the try on another part of the bone, and then I do everything, then cut as much as you can with the incisors of the bone that is between the plugs, and do it as subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, as long as you draw the bone from your hand, or from any of the splints that you have like nails, pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and keep your hands away from the skull and the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	When you perceive the bone, and treat it, if you cover that the worn-out plate of the bone with another instrument resembling an incisor, but it should be more fine and delicate than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if there is no wear on the small bones, neither any scales, if the light bones are slightly affected by the strains.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound and injuries that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way of treating it is what the Gaulish doctors say, which is more certain.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the loud one, very much so, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and bleeding. Once you have removed this part, measure from the edge of this incisional lenticular loop, of which the shape is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut too much of one part, and the other part becomes in two pieces, so that when it is cut, it is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then, with a small tool, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and you will be well prepared for the cloth that is loose.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is near the bone, if you lightly touch the bone, because one touches the bone painfully and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	When the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only covered by soft tissues, and it has small pieces, if they cover that roughness, and smooth the scales with a subtle rasping tool that you must have several quantities of, to adapt each limb to its use according to the type and position of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you shave in front of a coarse rasping tool, and then switch to a softer one, and continue doing this as much as it is necessary.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In every other small incision and subtle break, it is necessary to amputate according to his address.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And that is something that cannot be answered by the one who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the scar is discovered, then it is necessary to apply oil on linen according to the size of the wound, and the ointment is put on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another doubled strip of linen, and the ointment in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first strip.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you please, so as not to worsen the scar, then apply with another piece of linen, and do not strain it too much, only as it will tag the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And let it stay in the bed for one or two days, until the inflammation is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of various kinds, flour, and powdered incense, and Aristolochia, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And make powder from these things and place it on the wound, and administer further medications without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And ensure that the wound is clean, do not apply ointment, and do not gather bows, because when bows are assembled on the skin, they often cause great pain to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when something biting is placed on the skin, it may cause harm.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If no accidents come to the patient, if no one doubts, as we have said, if there is any doubt in sense.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no color comes forth but through medicine we have put on, which has some virtue, then it is necessary to apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and then place it on the skin.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment is in various ways that cover the wounds, as long as they are healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Scars that have never been broken in the two parts of the skin, or only one, are because they are bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And that is cartilaginous, and does not break easily, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off the small toe or nail and make the break as equal as possible on your index finger, and in the pocket until it matches its natural figure.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain from your operation.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the middle of the nail and cannot be reached by the thumb, then you must place it evenly at the tip of a large pocket.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, then you should redo it, and hurry to restore the first joint, if possible.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if this is not possible, then after the ninth or tenth day, when the wound has stopped bleeding, cut off the small toe and nail, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	If you cut one part, the other will also break.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and if they are too large, they fill the abscesses with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no restaurer will say that one must smooth the wounds with a blade, and each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It seems to me that this is the best, but they should be made in the composition of mull, and oatmeal powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the dressing, until the bone is firm and the cartilage becomes hard.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And no time is lost in putting sheep's gut in the wounds, and if the skin is loose and hangs down, and holds tightly, and smells the salves among.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the swelling comes to the eye while you are working, if it is made of wool or cotton that has been greased with oil of rosemary, or in a pot of vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not heal, apply plaster made from flour of sisal, incense powder, and lamb's wool ashes, then place soft sponges on it, and do not tie it too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the wound is small and it is torn into thin pieces, and the tearing is done with suitable instruments, then cauterize, and treat the surrounding things as charred, and swearing, if burning and cauterizing are suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound or small wound, and the patient is cured by tenting, and puts on bandages, as soon as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is slight only, and not in two pieces, but rather a thin crack, which can be felt, if one knows how to do it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the left side, that you bind your index finger in the mouth of the midwife.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then bind your index finger of the right hand with your left index finger, lightly bind the fracture, and fix it with the other hand in place.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is described as a second degree, then it comes that you administer extension of two parts, as long as it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth move or break, or if they are pulled out of a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put the thread on the broken jawbone, and put two sheets over it.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And put on the patient's head a well-made cap, or a piece of leather that is long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it to the neck that you choose, and instruct the patient to rest, and give them light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the joint changes shape, if it shifts during the night, and then return to the point where it was previously;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a poultice on it, with flour from the bolster or wheat flour, after you have applied the mustard to the head;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and place the poultice on it, with a light bandage, and if it becomes wet, let it dry completely before changing the dressing, as long as it remains healthy;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	The patient's condition improves after three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the wound becomes inflamed, then we have said many times what to do about it.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	If there is a fracture and wound combined, the piece of bone in the joint is reduced.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If the bone has subtle projections that are flexible to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all the pieces of bone, and there is no need for them, if the wound is wide, and place them in removable dressings as needed, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	Of the force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The force breaks more often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways.
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or it is broken and displaced in two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is a fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the operation is when the fracture is near the wound, if you have two assistants, so that one marks the helper who feels the force of the fracture.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and he extends the other arm towards the part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the incision at your own side, as it should be, and make sure there are no appearances or movements.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you must extend further, then place the shoulder of the patient against a round object made of linen or wool, and make it as large as necessary.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and hold and gently apply the force, and pull the bead towards your hand, so that you can place the incision at the same point as before.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you do not treat the head of the force with care, because it comes in front, and the patient may fall on his face or head, and place the shoulder outside the eye socket, and support the shoulder with your hand until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then close the incision at your own side, and if you break the limb, then it is necessary to amputate.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	And then cut through the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, if it is one of the incisions you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but if you use too much force on this instrument, to avoid damaging the face:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and should be as wide as the bone desires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the will:
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two heads, if you see, and the larger ones are for wider pieces, and the smaller ones are for narrower pieces, according to the swelling of the wound you made when you treated the bones:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	When you are sure of the incision, if the wound is small, and if the burn is not large, or if you doubt the incision, if the wound is made of linen and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if blood comes out of the wound, then pour oil on it, rosewater, and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The softening of the bone is when it has pains and is feeling small, you should then put on the bone a poultice made of flour and urine powder, and light sponges, and a spike of wool at the end, if you have the skill.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage of a palm leaf, then put on a double fold of sponges, and apply it.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin needle of III dozen wide and long, and wrap it around the bend, so that the end of the bend is secure.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the needle on the bridge, turn the bend around the neck, and take out the healthy shoe, and take out the sick shoe.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the bone holds the bridge firmly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move from the broken bone, then reward each one accordingly, and when the joint is loose, then the constraint.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie down on his back, and when he falls asleep, put a small pillow under his head, to lift the helper to the top.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If the fracture is aligned by aligning the shoulder or tying the arm to the collarbone, and it does not dislocate due to accidents, it should be able to hold for about 20 years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then continue the splinting, if you see that it has its use, and tighten and release it as needed until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it will be restored in about 28 years, with no harm to anyone.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Only the shoulder bone breaks or becomes loose in the body and does not move on its own, and it does not occur unless touched.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If the limb appears distorted, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put powdered sulfur with much urine on the limb, and lightly sprinkle it, and make a double loop.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put a wide and thin plate, a bit larger than the shoulder blade, on the limb, and if it is not well adjusted, use a woolen bandage for adjustment.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then tie it tightly with a long iron band, so that the plate does not move from its place, and watch the line every hour.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it is dislocated, if it is pulled, and sets the joint at its place, and the patient feels pain on their chest;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the spine is restored in XX days or XXV.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, if it does not return, and be sure, because this is only what makes the joint feel lighter.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone is found before the other, and there is no sound when it is struck, then it is said that the bone has been fractured, and we make the repair as we have described in the reduction of the force of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is never broken in its environment, but this happens rarely.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the joint.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the environment, if it is out of place, and there is great pain, and loss of strength, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and opening the wounds in the broken bones, and they feel better.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is when the patient feels pain on their chest, and the spine is set between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the two costels at your hands, and subtly put them all in the way that you can, as long as the bone feels like it should;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then apply splints and bandages over the subtle surface of salt or another light substance, and wrap it around the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And turn the tie around the back, and hold it tightly, and reward each hour with a drink, and if it loosens, then tighten it.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it comes loose due to corrosion or pruritus of the limb, or pain or gangrene, and loosens, and loosens the bandage, and adjust the splint, and address what came from the ways of treatments.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the guide, and hold it as long as it is stable.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Fractures of the ribs only occur after the back is broken, and at the top of the chest, and they do not break for any other reason, as they are fatty.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And it feels well in the examination as it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is if you put the fracture in place as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then place the plaster and draw it tightly with a steel bandage, if you have the skill for it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is inclined towards the chest, it feels very painful and pointed, like labor pains, because the bone does not cover the skin.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it has points, and all other symptoms are vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have put great emphasis on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	If it is said that it should be administered meat that inflames the belly, by fastening the girdle around the loins.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, as it is not necessary to have apostemes if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then it is the right one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And say no one puts forceps on the leg, for they form like reason.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, it is not certain that the forceps do not cause doubt when the leg has too much tissue due to its position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them say that they should cover the throat with oiled wool and put tents between the ribs to measure the length of the rib cage, then treat the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure due to the bone not piercing the tissue, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to cut off the shoulder of the coste brisie and put an instrument to hold the face.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And therefore, one must break the bone, draw it lightly, and then cut the lips of the wound if they are large, and treat them with plasters as soon as possible.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	If the abscess pops, then put on the cloth that is greasy with oil of rose, and put it on the leg.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the leg while it is dislocating, and put on the cloth that is greasy with oil of rose, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the break of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No breakage ever comes to the bone of the knee, and it never happens when it slips.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	When nothing comes to help, and you see if it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Dangerous are those who die in many ways, and if they are silent and feel well when extracted and not stretched, dangerous ones that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put them under care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of the bones that are soft, and the accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is a jump and vomiting with will;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	When it is removed from its place under the belly, it seems to come out willingly.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he feels pain on his back and sees it swelling, if he can.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Severe cases that are fatal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If they do not labor much in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is to reward it if it has an abscess, by putting on oil rose or oil of mustard seed until it is calmed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on a comforting plaster and let it dry, and tie it with a cord, and command the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that part where the pain is felt, as long as it is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	If any bones break, then cover them with a cloth.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is large, assemble the two sides of the wound with a stitch as much as possible, then apply a poultice made of uncooked wool, until it is healthy.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	If the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone", take your left hand packet and place it in the other hand on the part where it hurts, then put the splint and the bandage over it, if you can.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then hold it steady, and if it has broken bones, then cut them off, and the bone, and dress the wound as much as possible when it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	A sudden injury occurs when the shinbone is broken, and if it does, it is not usually a serious matter at the ankle.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	The broken bone becomes long and twisted, causing pain in the jaw, teeth, and surrounding tissues, and the broken piece is felt.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	If you extend your hand over the broken bone as far as the fracture site, the repair can be made.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	Inspect the break and its position to determine the best course of treatment.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	If the break is only at the ankle, place the fracture in proper alignment and hold it there until it heals naturally.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it declines into the dens, then I command the patient to lie on his stomach as much as possible, until the restoration of this fracture is clear.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have placed it evenly, then place the template on it, then place a piece of flax or thread, and tighten the knot, if it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and use the shoulder blade as much as the line is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if abscesses appear, and they come, if they do not hurt, then as long as the abscess does not hurt, and put what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and tighten as much as it is possible, if there are no other accidents.
et c’est li maniere.	And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The helper is that which is between the rib and the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, then it should be restored according to one of the following ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	One way is to use a piece of flat stone, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And place the heads of the bones in this way, and hold them up, and put the patient on his side.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then the patient's broken arm is placed on the flat stone, until it reaches the shoulder, and has a small hole in the stone, then it can be used for no heavy thing or to extend the hand.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then put the forceps evenly in your hands, as long as the forceps return to its original position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way, if one cuts the patient's hair too short, and grasps their hand at the wrist, then commands the ministers to touch the parts that are bare on the patient's hands, and then touch the rest of the limb without touching anything else, and extend each part to its place.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too painful, then force the limb away from the bracelet, and remove the bracelet, and extend each of the ministers to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the forceps is near the shoulder blade, then you should put one ligament on the other side of the shoulder, and the other on the other side.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the forceps is towards the elbow, then you should lightly put the ligaments on either side of the shoulder, as long as the forceps is even with the shoulder and the elbow.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then place the forceps evenly, as long as it is possible, and hold it steady, so that it does not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	When the abscess pus comes out, if it is not strained for seven days, and it is rubbed with fine oil and rosewater until the abscess pus is eased.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then strain it, and the way to strain it if you place the plaster on the wound, then gather the arm with the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And tie the bandage, and strain it with the helper and on the arm, if the arm is in the elbow, nothing will stop you, or if the shoulder is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use these, and place the cutting on a larger and stronger bone than the others, and have between each cut one space of two spaces, and make each space as large as it passes the break three times of each part.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then draw the saws, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, making them stronger and less slanted.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	If you see the seat of the saws and the stretching, as we have said, in the bone that you are resetting the broken member, and you doubt the grip, if it leaves it to tighten in the ninth day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at each of the three years, whether the link is itchy or does not come to the skin, or the incisions do not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if there are no such accidents, then it should be done, unless after three years or more, the patient falls asleep and has his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And then place the assistant in a plain linen bandage, and look at each hour of the day or night, whether the broken limb does not move, or is not smoothed by the ligatures.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If the address is by the virtue of medicine, and it is the meat that we have before us, in part as to make the meat subtle at first.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when it comes time to take it back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the helper and the leg should be taken back in XL jors of everything.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And therefore, it must be deshed and administered with baths and remedies for the wound to be healed.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is thick and blocked, it should be desisted for 4 to 6 weeks.
de la brisure du bras	of the shoulder fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "femur" and "tibia", and one of them is smaller, and it is this one that forms the pouch.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is distorted, towards the small doe.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance, only the large fleshy part, or the small one, and by chance, together with the eyes.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small fleshy parts are broken, the restoration is lighter, and the cures.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large ones are broken, if it is a poor cure, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small splints are broken, it is best to extend them lightly and make them even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large fleshy part, then it must be stretched more forcefully.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it over the thumb, and stretch the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones must be lower than the others, and the patient should be crooked over it, and the thumb in front of it, so that the patient does not suffer any labor.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the muscles of the arm to the part opposite the hand, or to the elbow, and some other muscles to the other end.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he places the head in its place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, he places each in its place, and if there are no loose pieces that point to the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, set the bone and the head.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the force of the wound, I have spoken to the single surgeon;
si pren la cure.	if it is treated.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur that are difficult to remove, if the dressing made of olive oil and wax is not too soft or too hard, it should be.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and gently lift the dressing as long as the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then the bone, and he puts the plaster with a lot of powder from the mill with urine, because it puts the stitches, and it is the plaster of the fracture that is further apart, and a little wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and you should say that it must have six stitches or bands in more positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two:
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and is pulled more under the fracture than elsewhere, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter:
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and be the bandages that are under the wet and moist fracture, and not be too hard or rough:
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let it be the son, who is far away, from the lion, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some years.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any harm comes to the member, if it is like pruritus to the member, then you must wash the member with hot water as long as the pruritus is calmed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member rest without being too tight.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then the inflammation resumes, and if the limb is smoothed and the bones are revealed, and it seems like something, if it is removed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling is not coming to the member because it is too swollen, because there are no poultices that can relieve it, and let it rest for some time until the swelling decreases and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If these things do not come to the patient, if he does not loosen the dressing for 20 years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or if it is necessary to examine the chest, then one can put their hands on the chest, and the chest should be even, and it should be quiet and calm, and it should sleep on its back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And you advise that this cauterization is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the wrist fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Wishes that on the back of the hand and in the two wrists there are few fractures, and only painful swelling many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or crushed, if it comes that the patient lies down correctly, and lies straight in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then the patient places their hand on the extended plank, and extends the muscles of the broken bones, and places them evenly in the joints, as long as they are well connected.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And then the patient applies plaster and bandages, and if it does not come, then they put a stopper according to the size of the limb.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and is wrapped in one layer of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is at the side of the hand, I make a ring of bandages, and instruct the patient to tighten it on their broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Then the strain of a long, loose hair, and it is the same as the pain of being touched to the palm as large as the plant of the hand, and it is held steady, if it can be done.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the neck, then if you place a splint on it and another one in the plant, if the hand is over and straight, then the bone totally enters the hand, and it is held between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the cutting comes to none of us of the two, if it is closed, then it is closed, if it can be done.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and it is held with the palm, and if you see if a straight small finger is raised to lift the cutting, and does not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the cutting is in other two fingers, if it is closed in the index or one of the others, if it is closed, and it is held with the healthy thumb that is after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	If you tie them all in one knot, as much as it is worth, or if you put them on a stool, as we have experienced.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and positioning of the abscess, and cut away what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken limb
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The head of the shoulder is often broken many times, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration if it is tied with the ligaments of the fracture, and the other is loose.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient is guided by his face, then extends each of the muscles of his limb equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	When the fracture is out of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the limb, then some of the bones are turned away from the point of impact, and the others are broken at the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it is near the knee, then loosen the kneelinks and extend the leg.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the bone in its natural position and adjust it with your hands until it fits, then insert the splint and wrap it around, and do not move unless it does not fit.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if it has swelled, then leave it to rest and return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in parts.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap it around the fracture, doubling it in two or three, and removing any excess, then bend the leg until the heel touches the root of the nail, and tie one end of the cord between the knees and the leg, loosening the knee joint, and let the other end of the cord go to the ankle;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn the leg and the thigh of the knee, then put the splint on, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use the seventh between the leg and the thigh of the drapery to evenly stretch the strapping, then begin to tie the third or fourth formation above the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as more is added to the splint, the less it is tightened.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take the two filaments that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above them, then return to the opposite end of the knot at the chief of the filament, as long as you see the knot loose.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	When the limb is forced to move, if it does not move from its joint, then it is left alone, and it does not come out of its abscess or swell in any other way.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, if it is not treated, and addresses the matter as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if it has pieces of bone that prick, then it can be treated; it may not be possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if it cannot be done, then the limb must be cut and drained.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment should be done as we have said, regardless of how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And no time is the joint broken when I place these, as in the helper arm and shoulder.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	In the restoration made thus far, it does not creak the patient's joints.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the cheekbone is restored in L years, or less than that, or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the right knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the right knee joint there is little breaking, but it often swells.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, if it is not much more than a fracture, or a puncture, and comes to all the wounds, and feels pain, and that feels okay.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is that it is placed even those that are loosened at both ends, as long as they can be assembled.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then the template is placed, and a ring is inserted if you have the skill, and it is tightened as it should be, then reward all the adjustments we have made in other dislocations, such as clicking and other appearances.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is an accident that it can happen, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	If the leg has two bones, then some are called "true" and others are called "false.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And it comes all the same as a broken arm, and for this is the restoration like that of the arm properly, and all the parts are. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bones are broken, and it feels great pain, and it is seen that it is very bad.
et torne desoz.	and turn quickly.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then, apply extension, and place it evenly, and bend the elbow evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, if the fracture is ugly, and there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and lift it according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your task, if you take two strips of fine hair that curl on one side and the other, and are long enough to reach from the thigh to the knee.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap the other around the thigh and knee, and tie it tightly, and at this time do not allow the leg to lean to the right or left, and it is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one has ever maintained a long leg without pain, and it has been found to be true, and they put it on the leg to warn of movement, and it is truly made in the fracture or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And shakes every leg to see if it has an abscess or no other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the treatment is as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones so large
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breaking of bones, but the large bones break never, and you must be careful not to break them in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there comes as much pain in the fracture as it is, and you see these bones over each other, then put them so that the top one is on the ground, just as it was when it was flying, and then now put your foot on the knee that was injured, and lift the bones as much as they seem to be in their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then place the cauterization instrument and extinguish it, and make a small incision in the lower part of the belly, then draw out the pus through the hole, then wrap the wound with lint and other things that you have skill in.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, you will find the bones unevenly broken, dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any of the two fractures, if they are restored, then as we have said, use your hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place on the other fracture a splint according to its length, and make a larger incision, then draw out that same hole you mentioned, and draw out the pus through the hole.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are more than two fractures, or more, if you make a splint for each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of lint and draw out the hole through the hole.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be situated under the head of the tableau, if the belly is not too full, in order to draw it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not ignore other things that I have said at other times, as soon as we have said them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and cut out every accident as it comes.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the point
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, if it is set in place, then it leans towards the side of the full belly, and it should be held by the ribs.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the bone with the natural material of the patient's cloth, and put it in as thick as I do.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then the woman is turned, and her back is gently bent a little at a time, and then she jumps on the cotton, as soon as it comes into contact with nature, and returns the bone with the stone.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she sees blood, if the cotton is wet, and when she has bled, it is reset, and in seven days or less, it is healed.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the fracture is restored, and if you see, take a bowl of bloodroot, and tie it around the wound, and pour all the blood into nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the cinnamon while the bowl is being emptied.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The nature so returns to the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it is filled with cotton, and it leaves no scars, as long as it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the elbow is broken, or of the woman, if it is repaired as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures are not hidden from those who study and use it, and they read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture indicates in more positions the right way of the restoration:
enten le donques.	read the following.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the garden, when it is broken, take an goose's grip and bite the garden;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	1. Then wrap the wound with drapes, and leave it for three days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, as the bone of the shoulder or elbow or appearance, that he be healthy now, if the wounds that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is, if the vitrol is not coming out, then continue to restore the fracture at the same hour, or the next day, if you are not able to come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if you are not able to come the next day, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as you are calm and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause bad luck.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is broken, it is separated at the point discovered, and if you want to put it back in place gently with your hands, at a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	2. And if the extension does not fit to put on your hands, and you have this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the size is according to the quantity of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	3. And for this reason it is necessary to pull three or four times, according to how much he has experience in each treatment of fracture.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	4. And it should be tight and large, so it does not slip under the compression of your limb in your patient's chest, and on the other hand, it should be large in front, and wide in front, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And is called "palinché", because it is necessary that the head of the bone be placed on the shoulder of the shaft.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And the bow should once again be placed, as it rises, and should be equal on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is not obvious, and the strings cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you cover the top of the bone with the string as much as it has power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you do not bring the bone back as we have said, if it does not hold with an appropriate instrument, whether it is a chisel, an incisor, or a more suitable one, to your hand;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then use the one that you have found to be appropriate in the hard and small holes in the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it indicates that there is something wrong with its natural state.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you keep it in its place until it is in the shoulder, then wrap it with black vinaigre, and properly so it is;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound or other parts unless it is oily, so as not to cause inflammation and decay.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer ointments as you restore the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it completely, according to the size of the wound, and make sure the wound is not strained with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times have I seen this cause the man to die, and have made the patient come out of the poultice or mortify or corrode never.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the scabs be softer and more moist than those of other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that you have had an accident, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if you cannot find anyone to help;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap it with cloth, in the limb of the wound, harden the ends, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, and if all that you have placed on it is beneficial for healing wounds, and if the ointment is effective and similar to what you have used.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary that you stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is painful and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limbs are straightened in a way that the bow can be easily moved.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they persist, and the bow cannot be held back, but moves forward, it is necessary that you try to hold the wound with a tent, and all these pieces that cause the pain should be realigned.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If an abscess comes to the limb, or in any other way of corruption, if you must cure it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and open the limb, as we have experienced with the bone of the arm or the helper's leg, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if you do not treat it, because many times there is death, but leave it until it bleeds;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance, the bone may heal after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If you do not, then leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The first sentence to translate is: "des brus qui viennent sour la souffrance
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the health of the fracture, but when it is near the joint, and it is a shame to see how the member looks;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance cannot make the member its natural position.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	But if it is near us, then we must help it.
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If the patient is given medicinal steam baths, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, and other similar things, if you do not take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with stebold wine or with a large amount of beer or with honey;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place it on the wound, and stretch it well, and do not let it slip from your hands.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then let it go, and repeat another one, until the nodes are straight.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you stretch a well-made piece of plaster;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of the plaster is that it holds all the flesh together;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the node is already converted into hardness as well as a piercing, and it is painful to the healer, then the coping is done, and the excess is removed.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you dress it with no rasping, as long as it is straight, and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb that is after the cast
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone fracture is healed, and the weak and subtle parts are recovered, if there come from the cause:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	if the other is because it was too tightly bound, and it was not well tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or if it has too many ties, and the nails cannot come to the member;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for multiplicity of bending;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or if it has too large movements, and it is not in its place at the hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or if it lacks blood in its heart, if it is weak;
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment if you make the patient lie down, and make the heart tense, as long as it does not multiply in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	And he is given water, and then he feels better and recovers.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then salt is applied to the member, if it draws out the great inflammation, and often the sweat turns green, as long as the inflammation reaches the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And it returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A dislocated limb after the healing process.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the members are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is deformed, it does not follow its natural course:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	If one does not believe the fools who say that one must break the member entirely at once, and many have done so in our land:
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	The first sentence to translate is: "et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en venti grans malz, et par aventure li mors;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	1. All voyages, if the nodes and tortures are fresh, if they can be raised with hot water, or if the mollifying herbs are cooked, like onions, and roots, and honey, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	2. and I apply a mollifying ointment, if well made, and take the mucilage of vismalk, and marinate with fat of linseed or oil of silk, and apply on it;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	3. or you take fat figs, and roast with colonic fiber, and similar medicinal things that dry the sweat;
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	There is no instance of the nodation being tightened continuously and long with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	When the tortuosity is awakened and made rigid, like a piercing, and it requires the aid of iron, if it comes close to the bone, under the subtle and light incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put on bandages and study the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sense to the target.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if we are late, if it swells, and by chance if we put it back on the shoulder.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	for it does not matter how we move it to the ear if it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times come to remove sand and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	always, when this happens, if I make the patient better, then leave it, as long as the abscess is closed and relieved.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then, heat the stiff and oily member, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the patient's own does.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the surgeons for the dislocations of the shoulder bones.
des mandibules	for the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	There comes when the mandibles are dislocated, and there are two ways to reset them:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	Either they are a small piece of bone from their joints, and are softened a bit;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Or they are completely dislocated and hang downwards, and cut the saliva from the mouth that they cannot hold, nor close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with the word;
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through the more various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is completely achieved and accomplished, then you must gently reset it, and do not pull hard.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the physician marks the child's head of the patient, and cuts off the nails of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which is of the second part.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand should be cut off to make them equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to file his teeth and mandibles, and move them all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the surgeon makes them equal, as they should be in their place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the head is gritty, then it is the same as the mandibles themselves, which are hot and oily, until they are reset lightly.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not try to fix the head, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	When they are returned correctly, and the patient's mouth feels well consolidated, if it is wrapped with soft cloths made of oil of rosemary and wax, then the leg is lightly tied with strings.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient sleeps on their back, and if their head is between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor exert themselves to move, but prays lightly with lean meat, as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jawbones.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then swallows what he sees lightly, and does not exert himself to open the mouth with his teeth and with drinking, as long as the jawbone is well cared for and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	1. And if the two jaws cannot be set in place at once, and are not converted to their proper form, then if fevers and chills come on, and by chance the abdomen becomes distended, and by chance vomiting of clear bile occurs.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	When you see this, you will know it is a disaster.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And many times it has killed those who came, in nine years.
de la forcelle	3. of the force.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	4. The force cannot be dislocated due to the cost of continuing the work and the pain, and it is always dislocated once in the defense, and it is felt by everyone.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient stands up and holds his side with his hands.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then presses the shoulder with his hand and it returns.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then places the splint and the bandage, and tightens it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head that is towards the cost is not able to be set.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it does not dislocate at all, then reset the shoulder on his arm, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then place the splint and bandage, and tighten it, and command the patient to rest as soon as they are able.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And then bring back the head of the shoulder when it is free from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	It is said that the shoulder is dislocated if it is not in its place according to three methods:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	that one is that it is dislocated at the part of the socket towards the side.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the other end.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance it is dislocated at the other end, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and do not dislocate the shoulder for the spine, and do not dislocate the tendons for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and more often dislocates towards the ankle, even for those with little strength, because in this jump it is most important.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	for those with enough strength, the jump is not far, and returns to its place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they are struck or injured, and the spine of an abscess is broken, and take care that it is not dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must check it, as long as you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when the shoulder is pulled towards the ankle, and there is a difference between the painful spine and the healthy one, and you will find a clear manifestation of this difference.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	You will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and remove the covering from the top of the shoulder, just as it is with some bones.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their side, and make no movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And if it is dislocated above, if it is not hidden, because you can see it from the covering.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset, when it is new, or if the patient is weak.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the way is to gently lift the hand of the weak shoulder up, then remove the covering from the top, and gently release the joint at the top of the shoulder.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and he gently places his hand on it, extends it upwards, and then places it down.
si venra hastanment.	if help arrives.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands after, if the patient must be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and he applies a soothing and softening ointment, if a decoction of honey and fenugreek and honey in hot water is applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then he wraps the patient's back with a bandage, and then puts on the other leg a stool of linen equal, not too soft or too hard, and then places the patient's foot on the stool, and gently presses the shoulder of the upper arm, and pulls the hand of the wounded one.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and some other signs indicate that the patient's shoulder is dislocated, if it does not move easily.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	That shoulder is back now, and if you see if the reset is done in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is necessary to immediately present the patient to a surgeon who is larger than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is necessary to turn the patient to the opposite side, and pull the shoulder away from the body of the patient, and gently lift it up, so that the patient's shoulder hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and some other signs indicate that the patient's hand is dislocated towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, if there is nothing heavy for them to bear with it, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	1. And the resetting is also done in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	2. and it is made by cutting a piece of cloth long enough to wrap around the wound, and the ends are tied together, not too tightly nor too loosely.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	3. Then it is placed on the patient's shoulder, but if it has been too long since it was cut, and the thread is frayed, then the sling must be replaced with a new one.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	4. Then it is extended over another hand, and the joint returns to its proper place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	5. If it does not return to its proper place after all these things that we have said, then this treatment is not effective.
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	1. Take the first two fingers of the left hand and three of the right, which should be able to enter through the eye socket at a point frontally on the axis, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	2. Then tie the head of the knot with the other two fingers, so that it does not tear the patient's skin, and then place it below the patient's knee:
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	3. Extend the arm above the elbow, tie the knot with the other hand, and stretch the other arm to the elbow, then pull the hand down and leave the chest hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint now reveals itself.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, as it should be, if you happen to put the glove on the other side, then put a thread of wool even, then sprinkle powdered cinnamon with incense and almond oil all over the shoulder and the back, then pull the glove off the shoulder, turn the linen on the thread, and bind the hand on its own, and let the hands remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he apply a poultice as soon as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then apply more after 4 or 7 days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is tight due to moisture that came, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three intervals, as it is placed before or in the chapter of cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and after 7 weeks, the joint still does not hold, and the arm cannot be raised with the elbow forward, then it is suspected that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And you suspect that the joint will never return to its place in the shoulder.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the ankles, or knees, if it is made by force, and stretching of hands, and it is treated at another time.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the cure comes pain in the limb, and then movement, if the patient uses cold water many times, as long as the pain is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the costly dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	The joints that are often dislocated are loosened at points, and the points return.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it has become loose in all parts, and even before and after, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it can be seen and felt.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it becomes loosened according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the male member with the female, if it appears open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the union is weak, and cannot grip the arm, nor touch the shoulder with anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as possible, because if it is not reset as soon as possible, it would be difficult to return.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be returned to its entirety, nevertheless when it is at the root.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	if it is better than the others, and it causes more pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration if it is, when it is like this, you can bring it back with your hand to your two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and the arms be expanded, and the hands are pulled according to the cost of the wound, from outside inward, and bind the jointure to the buttocks together, or to the root of the palm, as it revolves back to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when he doubles his hand on his hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	If he does not see it return to its place, then apply strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And if two assistants extend the arm, and hold it there, so that it does not move under extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm in each direction, then wrap a long and wide strip of cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you feel the joint of the shoulder joint, if no oil has softened it, then bend the joint as much as possible, so that it does not hurt.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in the shoulder, if you put a dry cloth with beef grease on it against the back of the neck, and bend it as much as possible, so that it does not hurt the arm at the collar bone, and leave some fingers free, then let go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	If the joint is tight in its place, if it loosens, and leaves it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	If you see that the joint is not tight, if you repeat the treatment and the joint, and leave it for a while until it is firmly fixed.
puis le deslie.	Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	If the patient feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it becomes still, if it is bathed and rubbed gently, and pressed until it is calmed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you put on the joint a fat sheep's wool, then leave it for an hour and a night, then the bone, and let it enter into bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it is cold, the joint becomes stiff, then the nail is removed, and then it is soaked in water.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And I do this two or three times until it is healthy.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see, if it is wet, and the heat is applied with a cloth, and it is strained.
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand becomes loose, and the return is lighter than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	In short, it is recommended to return the joint to its place as soon as possible, as long as it is loose, or if it swells or has an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And if you place the affected hand on a table and extend the fingers, and measure it with your other hand, then place your palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it as it straightens.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Indeed, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then place the affected hand on a table with your other hand, extending and measuring the fingers.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient should place their hand on top of their arm on the table, and look to see how the joint appears.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the strain does not ease the apostemas, and it leaves it in such a state that one must begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put the dislocated joint back in place after some time, then the joint will become more torn.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And do not think that as long as the hand is swollen, nothing can be held or fastened.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Therefore, check if the nerve is cut or the artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other way to fasten it than by fire cauterization, and unfortunately there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at the elbow, if they are placed on the incision we have mentioned, then they are stretched and left for a while, then they are released and left alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, if the heat of hot wine is applied, and the area is rubbed until it is dry.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	No time has the hand bone been dislocated at any part, no time at the back of the palm or abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore, the first sentence is translated as: "Therefore, it is the head, and hold the dislocation in your hands as it re-enters, then support the neck of the dislocated part, and it will go to the place where it was disjoined.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	And leave it for two days, and then put it in its place.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And if we have said so, and the limb does not move in a year, and the bone is moved, then it is relaid.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often, as long as it is wide, and do the same, if it dislocates in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, as long as it is healthy.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And so on, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the shoulder joint of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joint of the back is dislocated or becomes dislocated, if there are not enough treatments, it can cause the patient's death.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the sign is that it jumps and feels like it wants to hold it, but it cannot, and many times the members are softened, either the knees or the left arm or the right.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times it is still quiet when it is cut into 14 parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which is still quiet in the buttocks is called "glibosity".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that if you reward him when the glibosity has come from childhood,
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there has been no care or sanitation at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from cutting or percussion or similar things, they call the old ways of healing by great words, or it has no advantage at all in great profits.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated according to my intention, and formed strummens in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gallbladder disease that comes before, no one has ever been healthy or sound.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those that come directly in the second chest, and cannot be cured except for the one who comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient's shoulder is extended above his head evenly, and has no strain on him, so he does not freeze.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then, the surgeon examines the head on the earth, and another part is cut off, and a line is drawn around the patient's shoulders, and another part is trimmed, and the hair is combed, and the nails.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers cut the lines, one at the head and one at the other parts, among the thighs.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well closed, the surgeon as we have said, and the patient puts his hands on the spikes, as he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not recover through this treatment, then take a third arm of the patient, cut off the nail, and the surgeon should be in front, and bend the head of the spike off the nail, then place the mallet on the spike.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	And place the mirrors on the other end of the table, and press firmly, until it fits on the leg.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see, if you do this to the handle that turns on the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And if you fix the threads of the shoulder of a large hand, and pass them through the eyes, and leave a space between each thread, long and narrow, like a palm.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And have in each thread one hole, or the handle turns, and let the threads be firmly fixed on the ground, if they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each thread have one thread turning, so that the threads turn, and have in two turns two small threads of a palm length, to turn the handle.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the link that is among the staples of the harness to the head, and the other link to the other turret, and each of the ministers turns their turret on all the link, and the masters place the spikes even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, if you put on a desiccating powder with much urine, and then wash it off, and then apply a tablet of III doses, which gives the leg of the gilbosite and the healthy part of the spindle its color, then tie the link as we have said, and use the masters' subtle norrising powder until it is safe.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes at the end of health, if it is necessary to administer softening and desensitizing medications with the steel that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never administer a splint, and never come across the appearance at the back of the spine of a dull bone, and make sure that this is a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that is open, because one must not have too much confidence in it.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance, death might come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Advise that the joints of the shoulder and the shoulder joint do not come to be dislocations only, but they do not come as often as other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	1. And the joint of the elbow is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	2. and it is either bent or straightened, and in front and behind.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	3. And more the joint is bent, and less it is dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	4. And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when the diseased leg is joined with the sound one, it is longer, and more open, and the diseased knee joint is wider than the sound one, and it cannot double its size in fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	5. And it is the joint that is shortened due to abscess, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the healer, if this accident is against these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who comes at the front, if they are well his leg according to the completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	If the leg is not doubled, and if you see it moving, and if you see it before, and holds his urine, and wets his belly, and when he goes, if it passes under the foot.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him who came to the rear is that he cannot expand his gentle, and does not double, and this leg is more tortured than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is lowered against the costals.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	If the signs of this dislocation are like, if you reward if it is dislocated, and it comes again according to its position, if there is no care;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not necessary that he has presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry that you return the joint, and it is slackened and deformed, and the leg is turned to the left and right.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	If by chance it returns, and there is no other remedy.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong support, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or with the limb that is nearest to your groin.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and other supports extend your hand in this way that it binds your hands with its own belt, then you draw it across the groin.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other ties tighten the belt.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend them one after the other until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and holds them down.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in IV cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If the dislocation is at the shoulder, then it is necessary to tighten the bandage on the healthy side of the chest, then tie the ribbon at the root of the neck, and the limb that has been loosened, then tie the ribbon downwards towards the neck, and towards the force;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then tie a few more bandages on his arms, and wrap the largest bone of the malformed limb, and extend it to the deformed form:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	If you do not hold the joint in the manner we have described, then it may come to pass that you hear the two feet of the maimed person assembled as a strong tie on the two ankles, and on the two thighs, and so the maimed leg is extended twice as much as the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then it may be hanged suspended from the head of a post, and it may be suspended from the earth with the two arms extended.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then instruct the minister to bind the head of the cuckoo, and have other ministers hanged with the maimed person, who bind the cuckoo, because the joint now returns to its place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	When the dislocation occurs at the ankle, if the patient feels pain, as we have said in the one who has gout, and draws the legs of the affected leg properly, and also the foot;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two bandages, one on the head and one on the foot, then fold the bandage between the legs of the affected leg according to its shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When the patient feels pain in the area where the bones are moist, and it does not freeze the shoulder, then each servant extends their hand towards him, and he holds the dislocation steady in his own hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's bad.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place the compress as we have said in the gildershit, and apply it as we have described for the good of the malady.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is before, if it can be extended the frozen leg in front, according to what I said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And he puts the pain on the frozen shoulder, then presses with the other hand, and extends it towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the shoulder, and it cannot be extended the frozen leg forward, and does not lift from the ground, then it must be as if it was dislocated in the shoulder when we say so with the two shoulders.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and is placed on his face, and the link is extended as we have said before, and must be pressed against the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be at point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	therefore tie the knots, and put the bandage, and tighten it with a needle, so that the wound does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four hours, then remove it, and put the bandage on.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are equal, if tightened, as we have said before, and leave them for three hours.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then the cast, and I made another element, as long as the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the first dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The girdle is loosened in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	it is to know, of denser and deeper, and further;
et ne desalue point devant.	and not loosened in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if the knee does not hold, it is loosened.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration is that you make the patient sit right, and extend the leg if possible, and put your back on his head, and put his foot on your thighs.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take hold of your gut with your hands, and draw it between your two hands, then fold the two sides of the gut that form.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And then extend your hand further, until the gut returns to its place in the shoulder, and the signs are that it has lightly grazed your thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	And then apply the plaster, and make the thigh aerate at the knee, and the fingers assemble firmly for three or four times, then take it off.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And do not work too hard on the skin, until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not present, if extended firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the bowstring, as long as it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, and it is bent and twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are if the ankle is swollen, and try before the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	When the dislocation is light, it should be gently extended with the hands only when it is weak.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, if you must sit the patient straight, and hold them with one hand on the thigh, grasp the ankle with the other.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the leg away from you with your right hand, then with your left, then stretch it out, and hold it firmly at the top.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling the leg.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If this does not occur, if the evacuation recurs, because it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return, then pull on the shoulder with your hand, and make sure the opening is firmly in the ground between the fingers, and twist it gently so that it does not cut the shoulder.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then smooth the fingers, and some other fingers extend the wrist to the hands or to the elbow, so that it is above the shoulder.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each finger evenly, and the thumb should be between the shoulder blades to hold the shoulder steady while extending the fingers.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the other hand on the dislocation and have others mark the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it hurts sharply, if you apply plaster and cover it with cloth, and bind it tightly, and pull the strings that are at the ankle, so that the laces do not draw too tightly.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it alone for two to three days, and if the laces are loose, then loosen them.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then come back after a week or two, and have the patient use the splint for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	If it goes before the end, it is only a matter of time that it dislocates again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, it comes; then it is necessary to open it, if as we have said, it is healthy.
des dois	Of two, one
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, if they can be extended well in the work, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation occurs without any force on the shoulder, then it is necessary to place the patient's hand on the bone or on the table, perpendicularly, and put your finger on the opening of these joints, then press with your finger as it re-emerges.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is equalized, and there are no openings, if you place the heel of your hand on the patient's shoulder, then the joints will form, and you should leave them for a few hours, then remove the bandage.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And I make him rest, as long as he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen being restored, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it long, and if you are merciful and compassionate and slow, do not be hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of things, use calming remedies for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, if you now reset the limb to the joint, but the abscess is still active and draining.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the limb is at the joint, if you administer soothing things to stop the swelling and treat the wound, as necessary, with desiccants.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture, and the bones are damaged, then the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And keep from entering into despair, according to what I have said, for this is good according to your creator, and by the wisdom of your arm and heart.
