O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its explanation and by its explanations and definitions.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this part 'chirurgery', which is the work of hands.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has spread throughout all, so it is persecuted and rejected that science; and nothing remains from its force but small descriptions found in books by the ancients whose works have been moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this arises the errors and foolishness, with understanding closed off and knowledge abandoned.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive this treatise with the order of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; coming together are the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of work along with adjustment in explanation and preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found among us at present, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those involved to be versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they understand the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and their movement and vessels that move and rest, and from where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates says the joint with no movement is greatly valued, and that which moves little; especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if one does not understand what has been mentioned earlier, he should take care to avoid errors and causing harm to people; therefore I have wanted to warn many times those who involve themselves in this science and abandon sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a mad doctor who cut an abscess of hard swellings or the neck of a woman, and severed the arteries in her neck; hence so much blood poured out that the woman bled to death between her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he accidentally removed part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if it was too much for them to cut, they would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	A physician took charge of another patient, our land's duke who had a broken leg and an accompanying wound; the inexperienced doctor pushed the break next to the wound with great force without leaving any gap, and left it that way until completion; he instructed him not to dislocate again; the leg remained as such until fully healed and rejoined at the joint, ultimately leading to its demise.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I went quickly called by him and hurried to come dislocate his leg; and when he saw it was dislocated so peacefully, he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the contamination was already established in the member and could not be healed; the corruption continued through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see a certain doctor who collapsed an encrusted abscess, and then inflamed it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a cancer, when it is filled with black bile humor, does not require that you touch it with iron unless there is part of the head where everything can be removed if corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son of the wool weaver, you must know that work by hand is divided into two divisions: this is to say, in each one I will show where there is fear and danger in this book.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to guard against them, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in conviction and embark on treating the sick with ease and firmness, using the best means that by God's grace you may come to health and be praised; and let go of the illnesses that offer hopeful recovery; and remove doubt from your weapons so that within yourself you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take ill diseases for care that you may be called foolish by the wise."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have composed this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical-watery caustics, and the chapters are ordered from head to toe; and about swelling forms, metal caustics, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about tailoring and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapter is ordered and forms of swelling.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is on restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar matters; and it orders the resetting of the head down to the fingers, and the shapes of deformities.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to say about the quality of help and the harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are words of longest length and subtle science and secret remedies; and on this topic spoke many wise men, and agreed to it; and my purpose is little their words, because I repeat at length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps in all temperaments where there is matter; for two temperaments are to be considered: namely hot with moisture and dry without moisture.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the combined hot and dry temperament with matter, some say fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others argue the opposite: that fire cautery only benefits diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with heat from warmth nor dryness on its own; but those who argue otherwise say that fire cautery greatly helps diseases that are both hot and dry, which occur in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body and its moisture in relation to hot temperament, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I adhere to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	le ben; the same que heu, they do not s 0 (e: they to the time. If younus :
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the wise ones gathered together for the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of healing and brings greater good than burning with medical heat.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple and comes to fury only in the member that is burnt, and harms no other limb if it has any name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Ardent medicines come from one limb to another by adjoining, and bring severe illnesses of healing to the affected member; and sometimes they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its high heat and goodness of its essence does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experiment and long service to the field, as well as my study in which I have put great effort, on the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the length of words, for it pleases me not that you take away the secret that is kept or written here about fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; so receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when to perform the cauterizations and poultices.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate in all circumstances, because the harm occurring can be addressed by using cauterization; and especially when a cauterization is necessary for urgent and severe pain which cannot wait until more serious afflictions come upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish physician; because in the illness cured by cauterization there is no relapse; and they claim it this way; but it's not as they believe, for cauterizations are medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors which cause pain, and its value lies more in its swift efficacy and the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And one possible thing is that the illness arises at any time according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and are combined in him excesses by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless caustics administered on site where there is little excess and moisture, as with caustics for pain relief, and similar things, such that no further pain arises; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that caustics have value after medicine, their understanding is false, and caustics are the last of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they prove ineffective, then we administer our caustic treatment, and it has effect.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then truly, caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization instruments made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated there were no exceptions other than for the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; they also said that the heat from cauterization does not cause putrefaction but is indeed true as I have tested it myself, and found that in some men it is so; cauterization with gold instruments are as effective as those made of iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Even so, when you heat an instrument of gold, it is not because the color changes due to heating and then cools off quickly; if overheated, they require rekindling; thus there are sufficient obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use the fire cautery that has proven effective in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil caustic
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are for moisture and cold in the head, and therein one makes due to an illness called 'soda', and from numerous humors descending into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams, pain of teeth and throat, as well as all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	the se quitter that:
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then the patient should sit down, with their hands crossed in front of them, and place their hands on a small stool; afterwards put the base of your palm over the base of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever your fingers come to rest, there it will bleed, then heat up the cautery known as "olivare," for which here is its shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the heat on that spot with ink, and gently draw and stretch your hand little by little while turning it; then slowly release the hand until you see the small bone one piece; if you do not see it, resume heating as I have instructed until you can see the bone; afterwards take a bit of wax, put soft cotton inside, place on the spot and leave for three days; after that, cover with linen cloth soaked in oil; let sit until the burning is gone; then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon," until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if said by ancients that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, we aid in its healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must thoroughly cauterize if a portion of the bone is burned, and then remedy what has been scorched from the bone, and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must cauterize extensively, and push so hard as to flatten the bone as wide as the wreath women place in their hairs because the humors flow out of it; and one should thoroughly cleanse an open wound; afterwards, one should heal and bind.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me wholly good in all cases; rather than that in certain patients where there is room for fear; and it appears to me that I should leave them alone; because the head, as we attest from other members, becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions. Similarly, when the patient's head is naturally feeble, and the first sign of cauterization seems more beneficial and healing to me, then in such cases, my work aims for this combined salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From acute pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the pain in the head becomes chronic and lasts a long time, the patient should use years and pills called "coclearia," as well as purging of the head and oils and plasters; but if you perform the cautery we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's head is of a strong constitution and not too cold; then you should perform the cautery below that we have mentioned above, for a little while.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	by the. ous and but that s. This-do.
dou cautere dou chief	In the treatment of the head wound with fire cautery.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the illness extends to the ear, and the head is purged by medicinal substances, and other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases have been applied, but nothing helps: then one performs cauterization according to two methods, that is, with cold medicine and salt.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with cold medicine is that you burn a piece of wax, and remove the bark and cover it again with two grains in two places, then make an incision on the temple where the pain occurs so that you can replace the wax under the skin; and when it has been replaced well and left like this for sixteen hours; then release and bandage the place of the wax, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton plunged in butter until scabbing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is cleaned; and if you see any written prescriptions for burning medicines that I have mentioned or discussed in the treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron of this kind as follows. The shape of the iron to be used is:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. corner, and near one side there's a small opening; and place it on the inflamed area, hold your hand and gently rotate the iron slightly until half of the edge appears charred; lift your hand so that the artery does not burn further back, and abundant blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter, and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellus" at the tip, be careful not to seal the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you are treating migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if neither medicine nor iron suffices, then it is necessary to heat the "cultellus" cautery until it becomes white; place your hand on the tender area for half an hour and a quarter of its length, remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not seal the artery but only reach near the bone; beware of jaw movement when biting down and ensure that nerves are neither shocked nor causing spasms in patients, and guard against bleeding from the sealed artery as it may cause great fear and concern to those unfamiliar with the procedure or not experienced. Leave the vessel midway; but I will tell you how to stop the blood flow when the artery is sealed, and show you where this happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, caulk it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, apply the cautery we have described or extraction of the artery with the cautery having two blades; this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From coldness-induced ear pain
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain from coldness and you have tried soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not ease, then cool this caustic called "points," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the patient's ear where both sides feel pain, and moving slightly above the ear root after finding the correct position of dislocation; and at six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
de la torture de la bouche	Regarding mouth tormentor
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases; and do not apply heat to conditions resembling scurvy or black hairs from nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture that causes swelling from wasps and head purges, gargling, etc., then you should causticate the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on a healthy part, directing it toward the top of the ear just below the tip of the horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until half the skin is scorched; this is the effect of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the type of incision we have shown before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; then heal them as I have previously stated until they are sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When treating an old apoplexy as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you should make three cauterizations: two on each of the two points of the horns (above) on the head, one at the top, and one in the middle, and one where they are called 'vessels' as we have previously said, and apply a cautery to the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have mentioned before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pillows to clear the brain; then, after removing the chief of the patient's head entirely, place upon their occiput a hemp poultice as described in treatments for plasters; this is how cauterization should be performed: do so as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus healthy, it's good; and if not, perform the same as described: three cauterizations of ember below the head to the collarbone with two inches between each cautery; treat them like the others, and if you see a need for additional support, apply one in the middle; and if necessary, perform other cauteries on both horns until he is healthy as before. The cauteries called "olivares" are to be done as previously described.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of hair and as we have previously mentioned; after shaving the patient's head, then make an incision in the head and along each horn, and three on either side of the spine at the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers much pain, and the illness is severe, do four incisions along the spine of the back; leave it until the whitest hair grows, then lift your hand; afterward heal as long as it is healthy, and let the incision called "olivare" be done as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Surgical procedures should only be performed on patients who are phlegmatic, and first the brain must be cleansed along with other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when patients are suffering greatly and enduring much medical pain.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot endure much suffering, let them gargle and chew to cleanse the brain often with good meats; afterward, they have their head shaved bald, followed by one cautery as we have previously described, then another on the vein, and each horn; and if patients are very ill and enduring much, perform cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine of the back and neck, in a manner similar to how I have previously described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If it is a child who is suffering, perform one subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted humors and heavy phlegm, then the cautery of parts as we have said to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy are the diminishing excesses to melancholy, and the body of the ill patient is moist, then give him something to drink so that his brain may be clarified, according to what he has in terms of classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the head of the sick person; after making .i. poultice well made, as .i. circle, put it in his head; and the patient should be crossed, and held securely from all sides; present the liniment, and rub with butter of old sheep; and warm the cloth on fire quickly so that they may endure to pour hot water over them; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool down; and do this to each sick person once a week with other good governance until he is sound.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	When you see the need to cauterize, perform it in various ways with all aspects of cauterization. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain evenly; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter and fat from geese.
de l’awe des eulz	From the edge of the eyes.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs come first in the eyes as I have described in the division, then begin and give to the patient something that clarifies the mind, protects from all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding the patient to turn his head backward, and making a cautery in the middle of the head, make two cauteries on either side of the temples where the root of the hair is among both eyes together or in one; seal off all veins and arteries that are under the forehead, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood leakage, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it with a thread as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about extracting the artery and making an incision for how to staunch it; never make a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	And from the body, tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear in front of the forehead; and it is seen to be excess cold and phlegmatic fluids, then perform the caustic treatment as I have described at the beginning of this section: one on the head, two above each temple, and two along the eyebrows near the bone; and if there is a need for more, cauterize carefully just under the eyebrow with small treatments.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From within the body of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of urine cockles; afterward make a caustic treatment on his head, or an oil caustic boil; and also two caustics called "cloves" above the eyebrows near the cheekbones, one just below them; and watch out for the artery so that you do not close it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of fire cautery called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then one must use the "cautarization" from this fire cautery called "olivary". This is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that there are two cauteries on the two warts as long as the eyelids are; do not leave the hand except until one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	s
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never is it the case that hairs of the eyelids become inwardly directed, and touch the eye, resulting in cauterization by two methods: one with fire or with burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	The patient is instructed to let the hairs grow long and even; if they touch at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are fully grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the hairs have grown long and even, then place the patient in bed; above the eyelids, make a figure similar to a feather of mirtle (a type of plant), with the beginning signs below the lashes. Then put cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk oil on the eye, then apply the cauterizing tool as shown here:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization on the area you have marked with small and frequent touches, let the skin be scorched there; and the signs of health in the wound are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the size of an egg; then remove your hand, and leave it for three days, after which apply soft cotton soaked in butter until the burn heals; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come in and the paper softens as before, then continue the cauterization on that same spot; and if the hair is not sufficient, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and they are even, and do not poke at the original size.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery medical cauterization is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a leaf of parchment; then take French soap and hot wax, half an ounce each, and grind them well together; do it hastily so as not to cool down, then sprinkle on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place paper over it; if the illness is in one part only, work with just that side; if both sides are similar. Then put cotton wool into boiling water; and the patient'lete the head of the patient be safe and press your two fingers on the medicine, and squeeze a little every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, as he feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this at length, then apply the medicine as needed.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the swelling is gone, raise the limb again, and if you see it raised as though it had been lifted by constraint of fire or incision; then it's well done. If not, apply more medicine to the limb or where the medicine has worked, until your treatments are equal and your eyes are sharp; then cover with cotton soaked in oil until the smell is gone, after which cure the joint with ointment called 'dyafenis' and others, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And you must carefully watch your work with great care so that the medicine does not harm your eyes. If the paper becomes thin again, and the hairs prick in the oil, then restart the medicine on that limb as before; after which cure it until healthy; and this is the form of a foul mirror:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, let there be constraints; and do not put back the correct path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For treating a fistula with cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	to the cort i bida; sul. icie as:ss eid and, they, but. I; So, so. Chizcor nonece f (the ou; its pate t
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat both pus and dryness; and if it is closed, work on the surrounding area; afterwards place a hot caustic on it, hold your hand on the caustic over the part above the oil without letting your hands go wild; then put the caustic in the oil's fat, and let it fester.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you begin the cautery up to the bone, it would be best. If not, start the cautery again once more, and leave for three days if needed; afterwards place cotton wool in butter, and apply the drying ointment until healed, and after forty days when he is no longer sore, apply corrosive medication until the bone is exposed; then follow according to what you find in your treatise.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of treating a fistula that the ancients never mentioned. Listen to this about a fistula and its location; afterwards place in the opening a subtle comb like this one with its shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it in the quantity of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand or bandage firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted into oil; and you must place cotton on the oil for the sick person: the lead will then be where there is an abscess, and it heals with a miraculous sanity.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the abscess is healed by the caustic treatment that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer a poultice to the neck and bring the fistula back to its proper place in accordance with how it should be properly located there.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks on lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, there occur bubbles on the lips that are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these bubbles as we have described in the following method, and if the treatment does not work, then apply a small scraping cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it carefully into those bubbles until they burst; afterwards, remove the wax residue so that it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	by son ça ben'
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or around the tooth roots, after becoming putrid and rotten and aged and turning into a fistula; you treat it as we have explained in divisions, and it does not help: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the faster; after burning the opening or mouth of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes cold from its touch, and thereafter at that spot; and do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have explained earlier, until it is healed; if treated thusly, it is good; but if not, then you must expose the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in this chapter.
dou movement des dens	By movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work: then put the head of the patient in his health; after heating the cautery as described below so that you place a spoon on the tooth; and insert within the tooth cautery warmly, and hold your hand until heat comes from the root of the tooth; afterwards lift up hands and resume the cautery according to your will; after wash the patient's mouth with salt, and keep for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the finger which was moving is fixed, the gums softened and held still, and the moisture corrupted dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the fingers
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the fingers comes from coldness or heat and medicinal remedies are ineffective, then there is need for cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauter # query
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or copper; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, and the wool soaked in butter forms, and place on the aching tooth quickly; thus do this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth, and if you see hairs and cotton in cold butter, place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron on it until the heat reaches the hardening of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Caustery of fire is such that you take a piece of iron or copper wire and make it thick enough so the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the caustic, from which the form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the caustic has cooebed. Do this often because the pain will lessen that day or the next. It is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of that caustery, then remove it; and here is what remains of the caustic:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Make a caustic using whatever ingredient you wish and according to your ability; here is what remains of the mixture.
des scrophules	Of scrofulous swellings
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofulous swellings are caused by cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire of which comes after as follows: two openings for fumes to issue from the other part of the cautery; apply hot cautery once or twice over the abscess until it reaches the edge of the abscess; if the abscess is small, place a cautery according to its size and leave for three days; cover with cotton soaked in butter as long as there are no burns; afterwards treat the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	:1, witht ecz:
de la toust	From dislocation
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the prostate are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or chills, and it is an early illness; there should be two cauters on either side in front of the eyes; and another cauter between the two testicles; and let there be a cauter called "clavicle" according to the shape that has been described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see this, perform the cautery by holding the entire cautery called "points" which is used in the ear disease as mentioned earlier; and let the points be up to 30 or slightly more. After treating the area as described before, have the cauteries at intervals of three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And therefore are the cauterizations lighter because you make them thrice in one sitting.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then one must first address the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After soaking the patient on their back and sides; then lift the heart located within the space between your left hand's thumb and index finger; and if the joint is dislocated, heat the caustic that has two iron nails with a specific shape.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And causticize the heart until it reaches the ribs, and the figure of the caustic comes with four caustics; and this is done with the caustic that has three iron nails because the figures of causticization are these four caustics; and the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent is the shape of the caustic that has three iron nails.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it dislocated near this particular nerve, for which there are six cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After the cautery is applied for the grazes, wrap with linen; then allow the patient to rest and do not move their limb for a long time until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then apply a thick layer of plaster for the cautery application or many small cauterizations. Because the joint is reduced, and bone is dry, and the patient is relieved.
dou cautere de pleuresin	t f: bonceze ; you; T1;l's et te ne fun: Ca’t s, nor: ca peu par l’re :
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that you must make pleurisy fire cauteries from the roots of aristolochia in such a way: take a long root of aristolochia as large as possible and find it, dry it, and let it be both thick and long like your fingers; soak it in oil, hold it with tongs, and burn. One fire cautery between the forehead and neck, and two small ones slightly downwards on the part below the beard; two fire cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, inclined slightly backwards; one fire cautery at mid-thigh, another above the stomach; one between the two shoulders, and two in line with the two ribs further from the pleurisy fire cautery between the two shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but open it widely as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancient ones said that no man should use a fire cautery resembling razors, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then great pain follows as we have said in the liver abscess. However, in this work there is fear or many die now, or a fistula appears which cannot be healed.
de la mice	They say that no one should use razors resembling fire cauteries, and heat it, place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then great pain follows as we have said in the liver. However, there is now a fistula appears which cannot be healed.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease of madness as we have discussed in its types and treatments, and it is not effective, then there are three methods of cautery that are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	The first method is such that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of madness, according to the figure of the liver-cautery we have said beforehand; and do not press your hand all at once on each cautery, but let the patient be soothingly seated upon their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Another method of cautery is such that you use the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and lift the head where madness arises from the left side, and make elevations when lifting the head according to its size, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After placing the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, and then use the caustic hot iron, thus there will be four (healed). If you see so, cauterize with the hot iron at four places. Then treat as if it has acquired long-lasting pus like the previously mentioned cures.
de ydropisie	Ydropsie is a term used to describe an excessive accumulation of fluid in the body.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cauterization is not for hydropsy (edema), but in the manner called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to make four cauters around the hips, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at a place above the knees; and let the cauterizations be close to the source of edema (keur).
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery open to let pus drain for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient afterward; healing would be hastened, and together with God's help, both intentions are fulfilled.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterization for the belly be the clivulus that we have previously shown; and for the back, it should be an olive-shaped, as shown before in this manner.
de l’enfleure des piez	To address swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the fingers are swollen in one who is jaundiced and bright with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the fire cautery on the back of the hand between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery turning towards you. And do not go too deep in, thus avoiding squeezing out more yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After applying two fire cauteries on each leg at the ankle's edge; let the cauterie be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, mid-leg; leave the cauteries to run lengthwise so bile can drain out; afterwards, treat the other sores as we have said.
de la menoison	Regarding the melancholy condition.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of a stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are flooded, they cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient well suffering with great strength, so do .i. large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before or stomach cauterization, around which cauterizations subtly circulate; and four cauteries surrounding the belly subtly within one fine cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do a large cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When bunions are present at the base of one or more toes and are long-standing with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have described in sections, if it proves unhelpful, then apply cauterization: three on the spine along the back, that is gradually forward from under the almandate point, and one below the buttocks; two points.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think the stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then apply one large cauterization to the stomach as previously mentioned, another on the liver, and a third below the kidneys where all cauterizations are located; leave the cauterization for long periods. After that, treat the limb until it is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	From the chilblains which are called "theelule"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you come to the joint, wet the caustic which seems like a brush, and then set it all ablaze on that part of the joint touched; let your hand and the caustic reach until the vein's birth, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large caustic on inflammations, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When patients cannot endure cutting or incision, we will tell you about it in its place; if there comes a sickness that cannot be healed but by caustic treatment.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When it comes to any abscess that is old and filled with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, you must probe the entire delicate area carefully, knowing every part of the extent. After heating the cautery which appears like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered inside, and resume the cauterization until the body is purged from all impurities, once or twice or three times, depending on the quantity of matter needed; be careful not to burn any nerves present, and avoid large veins. If the fistula reaches the bladder or intestine, protect these openings, and do not perform an operation elsewhere except where it is natural, considering that it is not entirely foreign; after treating the opening until healthy, if the material inside has been expelled over a long period, then know that the opening is completely healed. And if the materials have not been removed, understand that the cavity is infected and corrupted at its base; thus as one of those we will mention in relation to the site.
de la maladie des reins	Concerning kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of cold comes with severe swelling and lack of desire for women, then you should make fire cautery on both sides with the pointed caustic iron that we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladebag is heavy and cold with moisture, so that the patient holds urine, then you should make fire cautery on the part behind the bladder where the hair begins at the tips of the fingers; there should be one cauterization to the right and one to the left, each as long as our finger joints; and you must also make a back cauterization along the spine, or two if needed; and use the pointed caustic iron according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	Of the dislocation of the joints
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers (testes) are corrupted and their ends delayed; when they come, it causes great pain: then one must do iii. cauteries around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary bladder cautery, and ii. cauteries behind the back; and let the clavicle be cauterized, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	est (buttray the zen dou that:m'fle t
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If these fire cauteries are not present, make three large olive-wood cauteries, and the cauterization should be as wide as all the keys; cauterize until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint and it is coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division and treatment does not work, and the disease is long-standing: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and there are two ways of performing it: that is to say using medicinal herbs and fire cautery. Fire cautery has many methods, one such method being as follows: you make triangular burns around the thigh pouch three times with sufficient depth and width, keeping a space between each burn the size of an almond; it should be in the shape of an olive. Another time, the burn is made inside directly under the top part of the thigh, so that there are four such burns following this pattern:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see the burn in the circular manner we have mentioned earlier for the thigh dislocation; but make it such that the circle contains the entire thwart and all parts of length are burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And that is how it's done for sciatica when the pain stays in the thigh and does not reach the thigh or the leg. If it goes up to the thigh and the leg, then you make two burns where the sick person indicates their pain lies, and one burn just above the ankle four finger breadths; and it should be a cuticular cautery, and it must burn the length of parts. And if the patient feels that the pain has extended up to either two toe or three fingers away, then you make at the pointy burn which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary to act further; and if there are signs that the pain comes from under the knee towards the thigh, perform cauterization with a cutting caustic or circular one, ensuring good care in all your cauterizations so you do not continue burning the nerves and large arteries, and cause no further harm or constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen others who performed cauterization on the ankle joint, and they continued until the leg was completely withered, as were the bones, and all the bones perished. Afterward, a stomach treatment which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cauterization on each part accordingly. // And they say about the caustic for the hip joint, which follows this manner, make it out of a type of iron as large as a little ship'leteal or slightly smaller, and be placed between gaps with space equal to that of a nut of peas; have two partitions across its length, like this too, and also evenly spaced; and there should be an iron bar well made. This is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until all are red and blistered, then place it on the bandage of the injured thigh, and turn it over to the ribbed side; and once cauterize with a hot iron and leave for three days; and afterwards apply an ointment poultice for extended periods; after wound care until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few people use it; nonetheless, such good cauldrations exist that can be borne, and where they take hold.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these resembles fire cauterization; rather it is for those who have suffered an infusion of cold substance.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been purged of putrid pills or other similar substances, place them on their back where they feel pain; mark three lines with dashes, and in each line do five fire cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure. The cauterization should be done like the one called "pins", and if so, make three or four at the midline incision according to this method:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this illness comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; you will find it at the last vertebra of the back and near its appearance on other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound being cleaned, cauterize it with a caustic lancet in the following manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the caustic lancet is required for any part of the spine, and you see it, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making 2 or 3 lines that are close to each other. After cleaning, leave it until healed as we have said, but be careful not to place cauterization in an area of nerve bundle swelling.
de la dolor des jointes	For pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moistures that have spread to every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold conditions and cannot be cured with medicines, then treatment is done through cauldrons placed around the joints of the foot, and each cauldron should be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is a need to grasp the face of the foot, then make cauldrons all around each cauldron called "point." And when pains come close to joints and other joints, which often occurs, then place three or four cauldrumbes on each part; for every olive-shaped cauldron. If more are needed, make more but do not hold your hand too far until the color of the skin has changed.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to joints and the back, then treat with the cauldron as we have said in this chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, place points around the fossa two lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make cauterizations at each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pains come to the elbows or shoulder blades, treat each part, and take good care of the patient and administer medicines. For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healthy with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the habit of the sickness
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the habit of the disease comes with buboes that descend to the knees and are newly formed, when you see them bursting, it is not advisable to wait until tomorrow; and use things that facilitate the belly so that the boils discharge from within. Afterward, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his foreskin as long as the buboes are healed, and massage the legs at his thighs, and apply a tourniquet below the habit of the disease above the bone of the wrist; and do this with a movement that is like half of a circle over the body. Then heat the cautery as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then massage the buboes at their place; and have the assistant soak his hand such that they do not return to him; work well on the legs of the patient, and put a cushion and a sheet over the thighs, and another under the feet with which he rubs his hands. Then apply the causticum over the mark made by your entire hand, and hold it straight and steady as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach on the first try, then repeat until you come up to the bone; and be careful that the boil does not ooze while doing this. Do not burn with fire, or else by this the patient will die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless. It is proper for children's cauteries to be subtle according to their size, and large people's also large according to their measure; after three days treat it at the caustic wound with butter until it is healed; then use other ointments until it is healthy, and lay the patient on his back for forty days so that the wound becomes well-stitched; and ensure that its movements are long-lasting, so that the bubble does not come out when it starts to walk.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, dress him with well-made bandages and keep them for another forty days; and let him have good rest, that he works little and is wary of too much drinking or eating, and shouting loudly; and when this teaching is completed, then he will be entirely healthy. And I shall say hereafter the treatment in his chapter on haircutting.
de la routure dou ventre	Concerning the treatment for stomach wounds.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When other humors come into other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and the length should be equal to three fingers; afterwards treat as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first sign the edge of the incision and make one line for the width above the humor, and another below it, and hold your hand near all of the cauldriform cautery. However, the first cautery is lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain lasts a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it should be treated with cauterization using a caustic known as "points," and the cauterizations should be applied according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, quality, location of twists, and degree of pain. If healed by the first cauterization, it is well; if not, resume with another cauterization on top of that one, as it is customary for the member to shift near the site, which is why you must continue making cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Surgery is sometimes greatly aided by cauterization, especially in diseases that come from the putrefaction of fumes and melancholy. Can you cauterize it, but be careful if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is healed according to what we have discussed in the classification, and neither recedes nor delays, and you doubt whether the corruption does not permeate the entire patient, then apply .5 cauters on the head: .1 above the forehead near the top of the hair, and the other towards the front at the end of eyebrows; and two on each side of the horns, and one behind the temples; and let your hand so that the caustic reaches to the bone, and until scraping out as they come out if the sores leave.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	If the bruises are scattered everywhere and they appear quite evidently, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned previously in chief, and also one small cautery on the edge of the collarbone, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and five along the spine of the back, and a large one near the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade, and two at the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and above the joints of the hands and fingers, and around the palms; beware of nerves that lie behind pressing, do not burn them; never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one elsewhere on the bone of the stomach, and another near the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the greater assistance it provides and benefits him; and understand that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as a healthy person would because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cauterizations to be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to how you will find them in the methods of iron treatments. Afterward, apply wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until healing occurs.
de enfleure	"And after applying wheat mixed with honey and other remedies."
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and salves, if it is not healthy, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size and significance; the cauterization should be just a small bit into the skin as desired. Then treat with ointments until it becomes healthy. At times, cauterizations are made on hands, feet, and backs where nerves move the limb, and so swelling is caused by bones; however, one must know the limbs and nerve exits to deal with such matters.
de albaras	The phrase "de albaras" in Old French does not translate directly into a meaningful sentence or term in English without further context. It could be a part of a larger word or expression, but more information is needed for an accurate translation. If it's a standalone fragment from a medical text, the significance might only become clear when considering its surrounding content and usage within the original manuscript.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" is chronic, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then cauterize with a small incision using a cautery according to the desired size; until the paleness subsides and its color changes; then treat with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, as well as swan blood and duck'.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When ulcers begin and you wish to arrest them, cauteerize with the fire cautery that appears like a circle, all around the ulcer. Nevertheless, wise men also say that one should do this in the middle of the ulcer; however, I do not believe this is good, as it may become ulcerated and corrupted, which has happened before; moreover, it would be better to cauteerize around it with a fire cautery called "circular", as we have said about many other fire cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot die out
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which takes too long to die or because of the excess it causes or due to the state of the patient when they are very old (that is, quite aged) and have little blood, or time; and you see them rushing towards death: then cauterize around with many small cauldrons by poking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the entire wound pierced, then warm the cauldrons of which there is no shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the midst of the disease called "adubeleti" until the cauldrons have pierced its core, and let there be such cauldrons that the patient feels behind them in a way that the flow of putrefaction is alleviated; afterwards cure it until it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	There is another way of illness called "corrosive," and it's nothing but a mass on the limb, because it consumes limbs just like dry wood does with fire. If you see this disease in place where cauterization with fire can be done without pain, then perform small and large cauters accordingly as required by its location or where the illness is; after cauterizing all parts to remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind except that what's corrupted should become osteomyelitis. Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the wounded cautery spots until fire sores are healed, along with any remaining corruption. After this treatment of salve applications causing growth, if after three days health appears good, then that's a positive sign; otherwise, continue cauterization on those areas still affected by corrupted limbs. This mass is never been treated in place by the medicinal water during the time of fire cautery; but even so, fire cautery proves more beneficial and I have already mentioned the treatment with medical water in its section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sores that come to the fingers
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often it happens that in the feet is a disease that advances and is called "closed" according to our understanding, and is a large tumor causing pain in the foot. And the cautery for this disease has two ways: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is such that you heat a caustic as if it were a spoon of waxwood, made of good iron able to cover the nail entirely, with sharp edges; after heating it red-hot, turn your hand all around the nail until it flows into the hole; leave thus for three days until pus begins to emerge. Then make an ointment from finely ground barley boiled with salt, and leave the ointamoast on throughout the night, after which the tumor will recede and be uprooted completely. Finally, treat the wound with a soothing salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted forward the body, and it often occurs in hands and feet; then you must administer hot water caustic: take a tube of iron or copper, or a spoon of waxwood, place over the nail and its surroundings; this is to cover warts. Place the tube so that it encompasses entirely, then apply some warm water, hold your hand firmly, and press back and forth until the edge of the tube reaches the root of the nail, allowing deep hot water access to the root; let the patient endure a bit of the stinging heat for an hour. Then leave it as is, and all its roots will be uprooted completely. Do this repeatedly until you remove everything from the body, then treat with healing ointments that soothe.
li cure dou trembler	after use the unt; The root, buttoe le plus they may of hire, then:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone shakes from coldness of limbs or fever quarter day or other, it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauteries or .iv. upon the spine on the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cauterization or pez, and one over the stomach at the olive oil caustic; this will cease their trembling, and restore health from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Of painful pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	At no time are they visible as downstream of the body bathes or pustules painful, that come from large corrupt substances. When first they appear, one should make a subtle cautery on each head of the pustule: a cautery made of wood from myrtle, with its point taken in fire, or long root of aristologist, or lenticular caustic. And whenever it is cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, they do not grow any more forward, but are broken down their superfluities which come from them, and become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is ligated
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often great harm from the blood of an artery that is ligated to a wound near the edge or through an incision in an abscess, or on a limb with cautery, and such things; it is a very painful thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case if it happens to anyone, hurry and place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very much until the blood is calmed from under your finger; then heat with oil (olive or otherwise) several small and large cauterizations as long as they are all red; then take .i., or great or small depending on the size of the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the caster against that vein while holding your finger, until the blood is stemmed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bursts when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another from those at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve near it, and no further harm comes to the patient; understand that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be adequately staunched if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have said: through cautery, or through extraction if untreated, or with strong binding thread, or with medicines placed on which there is power to stop blood; and let it be tied and strained at once.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the staunching of being tightly wrapped in cloths or with burning things on it, or other similar things; if not, soon enough they will fail.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then they should put their finger under the wound on the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it is stuck above the wound and vein; but do not move it, instead let it be cooled by cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and sticks; then make incisions there as needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for tumors.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, ointments, causes, and applications of cauterizations; and I placed that chapter up to the fingers, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same manner for it is easier understood as follows:
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be taken.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to be reckless. For many ways of people come in cures. If they are those who have become so accustomed to their illness that they die easily due to the relief they find from their disease, and its severity; and for these, one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these two there is one who gives his attention, and says: "Wait, I am the guardian"; and the patient becomes desperate. It does not matter whether you agree with those coming to you who have this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely of what you are certain, and which you can take and lose; and use prognosis and indication for the treatments of your sick so health is turned towards them; and this will aid you to achieve good renown, glory, and memory in the kingdom.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to seek the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	And I have ordered this treatise by chapters as presented here in the chapter on cautery that I have advised from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water at its head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the pelvis is too tightly constricted around the head of the child; sometimes it comes about without a known reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all cases that I have witnessed it has been fatal; so for my part, the work on treatments seems to warrant further investigation.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is too great, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is from bone, and the signs you see are the corners above each part, and the vein springs up when pressed by your hand inside, and it does not recede; then one must make three incisions within the head as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	the moste; The following; cue; ici:bonet; If they ne mez d; so n’s.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of making an incision is to look where the head of the abscess opens, and its water channel; for it is never before; never behind; never right; nor ever left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its water channel fills up, as much as you are able to do so; but be careful not to puncture an artery; let blood flow out, such that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of pus.
de reume	For restoration
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" affects either the eyes or genitals, and the illness has been present for some time, and medical treatment proves ineffective, then the subsequent remedy is with fire cautery, where two arteries are burned.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore when you have burned the eyes, that the patient raises their head; afterward, they rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extracting the neck to one whole cloth; then examine where the vein begins and ends at both sides, near each ear, but few are reattached; then seal the sutures, then burn one and the other from a sharp spatula of two parts so that it reaches the bone and is cut widely.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, take the spatula from under the artery and burn it above, cutting like two points across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is opened, it bleeds continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the arrow does not protrude to be felt, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then close and clean up to the bone; put in as much blood as five-sixths (0.83), with a little more or less depending on what the ill person can suffer and the fullness of the artery; then examine the wound: if it does not leave any splintered bone, no discharge from the arrowhead appears, then strain the ward, bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	If there are splinters of bone remaining, extract them; if you see that an ostentatious infection occurs at any time, make sure to dress it with a clean cloth or bandage. Then remove the wound as soon as possible and apply ointment until healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When early gout comes and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient headache and similar things occur, it is treated by methods of medical remedies which do not help, so we extract arteries from the temples and perform cauterization, as we have discussed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of extracting them is such that the patient rubs the hair from his temples and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it beats properly and does not fill quickly like in some men who are very cold; and if it refills, strain a piece of cloth on the collar of the patient, then rub the skin with an abrasive cloth, and wash the area with warm water until the artery is clearly visible again; then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then stretch it with forceps and divide it well from each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it at the tip of the pincer, then cut off that portion according to the amount of hairs. Because if it's not divided, all will come loose in every way.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the blood of .vj. days/, until .iij.; and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and bleeding occurs again; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with the caustic spatula until the bone is reached as long as the head remains closed; this is the final work, provided the sick person does not have fever and they are of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is aid in finishing the abscesses, for this reason it is more useful for abscesseS;
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And as on leu sont mes. ESTELLA, ce en toc. Sont cote d’o que tu est le c sunt cogner les pois il soit la ou se c de s conteres tu coulz. Cauchay l’est eulacqui. Ce sans est li est à plus ce de quitar une et a mais, en leu nus est c et. And les ointin; et cuit si to lignoles et c que ce d: qui sont nee clyne coumthat est ce la tene laste
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When excessive menstruation occurs, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a large space, and then when you reach to tie them together, remove both levers, and let an ardent fire burn until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two parts; they should be far apart by the two edges because it is not suitable for this entire cautery at once; this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	la s, and bly; they mde t e ce t
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "ancient contusion cure", and you must instruct the patient who has this disease to have hair on his forehead, then make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; one incision should be as if two fingers span across, going upward until the nose, with the other two being half a finger apart above the eyebrows, and avoid incision of arteries that are half a finger apart above the eyebrows; place your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, each wound should be as wide as three fingers across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and take a piece of sponge and clean linen cloth to wipe the blood, then insert the flat pincers into two parts as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that goes up to the second incision; and scrape off all skin that is between the two incisions, completely over the skull above the bone, then make another cut through the middle of the first incision to the other second one, and then extract this flat pincers.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "culterall", which on one side is very sharp and cutting, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And insert the sharp edge toward the chest near the heart, and the smooth edge towards the bone, inserting it until reaching the middle opening. Care for all vessels that arise from the head as long as the incision remains continuous up to where it opens at the throat, then continue on the middle fissure to the other end; then extract the blood equally, and express the spot for collected blood; then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form; after three days dissolve the ligaments, and apply generous planting of boiled water, then cure it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of the eyes of the head
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When from certain catarrhs they come habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with impaired vision and burning pus; and hair falls out, and there is acute pain at the forehead, and sneezing in patients; thus by these incidents one knows that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from a single vein, but rather they arise from many vessels, and it is this congestion to be cured.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one; starting from the incision at the temple on the left to the right temple, and extending up to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves at the temples when moving during eating. And once the bone is uncovered, squeeze out all blood into a sponge, then place cotton wool between the two lips of the incision, and try linen; then cover with clean cloths soaked in wine and oil, avoiding any burns from the heat; when it is removed (osteotomy), you must rub the area until new growth begins, then treat with cleansing substances to help healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And in this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts tansy, and soak it; then administer to these wounds for healing the entire area fully.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of stopping bleeding from the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, beast, stones from mining, or similar substances as metal; seedlings such as peas, lentils, and beans; or fluids flowing like water easily and resembling other matters.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it flows into the ear as a stone or another matter not adjacent to the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, distil some violet oil or sesame oil upon it; then perform extraction. The condition causes sneezing, and they stop up their nostrils when a sneeebreak comes, and put cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and raise the ear above. Often this cure brings relief; and if it doesn't, it is treated with delicate tweezebrs of which there are two forms:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps up with pincers, that's good; if not, prepare for the subtle extraction of a double needle; and if it doesn't come out this way, make an eel gut incision and insert the head of the eel or ear hole strongly, stuffing around the incision with soft wax so the vents cannot enter with the tube; then properly treat it, as often such force comes as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take grease from where the birds sit, and put on some instrument suitable for that purpose, placing a bit of cotton around; then press the grease over the wound or whatever you are treating, and apply treatment.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't come out from all the things we have said, quickly make an incision in the ear just as much as the abscess appears and swells, and the manner of making the incision is to first hold the patient's head steady; then draw the blood according to its nature, next seat the patient between your hands with his head tilted upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear near the fat or whatever it depends on; and let the incision be as round as a crescent until you reach the wound, then treat it to the best of your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if you are drawn out and so as it is made into this form: but not draw them the pierre or seint.
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision in that grain of sand. But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist due to earwax, until you have done so many times; then extract with fine pincers and a sucker, as we have said, ensuring the extraction is clean.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then when the water indeed flows into the ear, the patient should use sneezing techniques first, and plug the ear with soft cotton. Place it directly over that same ear where the water entered. If it comes out forcefully, that's good. If not, take multiple small pieces according to the length of your finger held lightly, and heat them slightly on a fire; then place the patient's fingers in their ears, and insert one side into the hole (created by water entry); and from another direction, use another piece against the ear where the hole is. Continue inserting pieces from piece to piece until all the water has come out, thus restoring full hearing; and if you see this, take a reed or similar instrument, place one end in the ear, and heat the other end on fire until it glows; then proceed with others as needed until all the water is gone, just as we have described for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of an object if it is small like fleas or similar things, treat as we have described in the division; but if it is a large size that can be felt, prepare for extraction with fine pincers; and the easier to remove will be what lies inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	During the extraction of worms from ears, when treating them as we have discussed in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy does not work, you must examine the ear with sunlight: if there are no worms visible, use fine tweezers and, if they do not appear, take a small hook-shaped tool from where it is formed.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	It should be narrow at the top and wide at the base. And put the more delicate end in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient is experiende, then push it completely into the canal; do this often until all worms are expelled. If they do not come out, stuff cotton around the canal as I have described for stones; and if they still do not emerge, administer distillations that ancient physicians have tried with incisions of worms, then you will find them or treat with distillations; and distil oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is as you see it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It should be made of silver or a fine-grained iron and have small holes at the top and bottom for distillation; and to press the distilled substance through an instrument of finely wrought iron well suited for this, and if you see, take a sieve and wrap cotton around it promptly on the opening, then pour your oil or juice in the ear canal, and let the ear be filled with the sieve and cotton; then press firmly until the oil is distilled or thoroughly within the ear. The patient feels relief inside, and there are distillations a small cakes around this fire so it can be distilled in the ear, but do not be too cold because medicines would not work if they will be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of stopping up of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any perception in their ears; and the same thing happens in adults due to a wound or foreign body within the ear, and these blockages always come partially into the ear so that one cannot see it; and never occurs where there is no sound perceived well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it comes partially and one cannot see it, it is of worse healing in most cases, and for that which can be seen, you must put the patient's ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, then work on this entire area where its form is.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	that s.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If the obstruction is present in the ear, take a fine, subtle knife and carefully heat it by fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the obstruction causing the patient to experience fear upon hearing, gently pierce, but be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent according to the width of the opening in the skin, and grease with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not touch the wound for any day until it is healed; then take a tent and grease with rosewater paste, and powder with sublimed mercury; if you see discharge from the ear, replace the tent and move another moistened tent made of rosette oil and wax until the inflammation is gone; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If bleeding persists, soak a sponge and drape with cold rosewater, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood accumulation which can be treated by distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelus that comes in papers from the eyes when they are wet and dry is such that it must be spread with tongs and tweezeboar, and wrapped around a spatula of its roots; then place on the luteolin mixture.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not decorticated, then cauterize with a fine lenticular cautery after the incision, and the cauterization thereafter is effective; often times things do not remain attached to their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burned and do not regrow.
de la gresle	Of the grating
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come to the papers from the eyes things that appear gritty in form and hardness, and therefore this illness is called "hailstorm," consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below the paper; the treatments are as follows: take care if hailstones move on one side or another, it's an easy thing to know how to do; thus make them wide apart, then gently scrape each part, then grasp with forceps, and bind. If you don't pierce the paper slightly, nothing will harm the patient; and if there is a large crack, assemble with a stitch, and treat until it is healed; but if it is small, do not apply too much pressure, for the ointment will restore them quickly and cause relief.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstones descend into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the hailstones with forceps, bind and press on both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the hailstones are scraped away, apply oil to cleanse the area and treat until the patient feels relief.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from under the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that forms under the skin, occurring mainly in children and not in adults; it causes great swelling around their eyes, and they experience catarrh in the morning, and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces for long periods, sleep with damp paper over their moist eyelids, which is concealed by exinach that appears upon waking. And when you press it back towards your thumbs and feel the fat pushing out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the treatment is that the patient places his head in water; then take a linen cloth and make it into a circular tent-like shape according to the quantity of fat from each side, place it over them; press with your thumbs on both sides so that the fat is compressed within the circle. Then use a sharp knife at the spacious spot and make an incision as wide as one makes in the vein's skin; scrape away the softened fat until you reach the exinach, which comes out of the incision in various shapes like pieces of pale white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull all of the mentioned piece of cloth torn between your hands in defeat, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; ensure that you do not get too close to the tear, so that you reach none of the entire area up to the bone, nor press on it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the head does not exit at the beginning of the tear, gently increase the tear as it appears; then extract it as we have said, moisten with linen and water, and place over the wound, and bind tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for such patients who gnaw at the wound and put on to spoil that moisture which remains; then heal until it is sanitized. And if there comes a hot abscess in the area, treat with emollients soothing until it is sanitized.
des poilz des papieres	From hairs of parchment
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs from paper arise that are misaligned and aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about types of diseases as accustomed to tears, wrinkling of papers, and albugine until it causes destruction; and there is treatment in four ways: by fire cautery together, or by medicinal ague according to what lies before or chapter on cautery, and done either by incision and suturing or by pincers, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is proper that you place the head of the patient in your palm, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that is good; if not, then puncture with a needle on every thread underneath; and do so at the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow near those hairs, and guide one thread along all over the paper, and turn it to the edge; then make in the part below the paper, below the misaligned hairs, throughout the entire width from large to small rim; then extract a filament, and place underneletechnical papers with cotton and linen threads. Then attach to the paper an outline of iron like that of a bellows, and always ensure that the figure is according to the quantity you see raising the eye which is affected by all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is need to cut a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper has been softened; then make all along the spatula over the two lines that you have signed, starting from the large ridge down to small; and let one of the fissures be near natural hairs in the growth of a root, then insert the needle into one of the angles with a hook, then scrape it clean; then sew the two lips together with a stitch of a single thread of fine woollen yarn, squeeze out the blood, and remove any excess threads near both eyebrows in all manner of sticky substances if you do this; and if not, don't worry about it, leave the seam and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without drying and tightening agents, because the paper will regain its position with the healing of the wound and reattachment, but the stitch is movable (as the elders say), and this work is without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you shape the paper into a form as like the marten'annointment, which we have described, with three needle-sized holes according to the shape shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if the cautereis d’autre de a formit a une.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	If you are unable to hold the forceps and the object is not evenly aligned, take a needle with some thread attached to it, and place it against the skin. Then thread another string around the large prominence and the second one near the small one, then join both strings equally; then lift your hand evenly, and remove all the tissue under which you have incised as we have explained, then close the wound edges with stitches, and treat it until it heals; if an abscess forms at your incision site, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	However, there is never a time when the hair on the paper changes color: if it's necessary to use what we have described for incisions; but stitches on both sides are more of an artificial nature.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of ulcers is as follows: and you must convert the paper and press it down according to what I have said, then make two stitches by hand, and two very thin threads as long as the thickness of the paper and its width at the mattress; then wrap both heads with the threads you hold; then carefully join the two together over the paper's edge on one side, and stretch out the two cords from each part; then leave them like this for some days, and the skin that is stretched will dry up and shrink and heal, until it grows back.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed and the bandage lacks strength, then treat until healed; and if the wound were quickly closed, and the paper raised so that hairs cannot grow again; and this is the form of the two veins that you will make according to this figure and in this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The technique of the work is that you take a fine needle and wind one thread of soft, delicate silk on it; then connect the heads together subtly, ensnaring both ends with threads equal in length to a palm's width; then arrange another fine, short filament of silk briefly onto the end of the first thread; then have the patient place their head under the sun so that the workings are clearly visible, for it is a subtle and minute operation; then insert the needle all the way to the root next to the hair you wish to remove, and pierce the paper quickly as you pull through along with natural hair until you reach the skin's surface. Then extract the hair up to the thread's length, inserting that same or additional hair if there are one or two or three or more; then continue pulling out your hand until all desired hair is removed from the surface of the paper with the natural hair still attached.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the thread has been wound and hair does not come out with it, then you will wind the thread back from its full length until the thread is visible by oil vision; thus you may wind up the thread and filament, remove the oil and leave them for two or three days so that the hair grows in place and sprouts on his skin. And if the hairs are long natural hairs, accompany one along with it and then leaves until it is grown and removed:
de la porriture de l’oil	from the rot of the joint
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or rot occurs in the joint, it comes in two ways: one natural and one unnatural. And it happens by sudden wound, cutting, or fire cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	ande to come onze que tu m. ET li l’o de la ou li avois du; andre de s, puis quiesse. Et: unt ande parle de de le ome dese lignant lor (li or li prise ce t's et lesa eau, qui est the vrai d cite a fadie de lade, eur;
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your care is to be vigilant that it does not change in any way from its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely directives for this illness, so that it may return as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	In the oil's flowing forth
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This illness called "axacrati," is truly known as both natural and accidental. The accident occurs from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the essence of its treatment involves using a needle with double threaded filament inserted through the hole in the spatula so that it extends to two holes at the top, then extending the spatula upwards fully with the thread.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the shape of the paper is restored as it should be, that's good; if not, take some ointment and apply it in the split, then turn the paper, creating two splits or cuts inside the paper; and let the head of each split correspond to the angles of the incision you made, so that when they are joined together, the shape is like a letter with "j" strokes; then remove that layer, according to the thickness where its edges join, as it should hold the paper, then bring the two separated parts close together and tie them with woolen thread; then apply what we have mentioned about softening medicines and bandages until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from splitting or stitching or cauterization, it is fitting that you make a clean split away from the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then dress between the two layers of a tent as I have mentioned; and you must treat according to the form of the illnness, for its forms are very diverse, and wise masters apply all possible methods so that it may return to its natural shape; and similarly for patients, depending on what treatment and applications in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	When dealing with an illness arises from splitting or stitching or cauterization; accordingly cleanly severed the hairs of papers between the layers of a tent as mentioned; then methods all apply, its form so may return to natural its shape.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs in human hands such that the paper above is soldered with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then it is necessary to place the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and extend the pressure towards it until you remove what has hardened within the subtle spatulum, which should not be too dry nor too sharply cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer from a spatulum that is too aggravating or blunts the oil; and make your incision in such a way as to scrape off the gathered matter lightly, allowing the paper to regain its natural shape; and it will be healed completely without any occurrence of fresh water, but with gentle water, and collier (a type of bandage); then place between the paper and oil a tent of linen, and above the oil lay woolen yarn soaked in egg whites; after three days use the mild collier and other similar remedamoisturize until it heals completely.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	That the unguarde est toutes nerves de baintes l’a convele cuyante a si que t'art les nervet, si il li qui vousre du ne oint: si ce l’unner la semblanz, et le pierre cest on li mener.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The method of making the incision is as follows: instruct the patient to place their head in an upright position, then begin work; remove paper from your hand, then file the nails with small double-edged tools and extend them upward; next take a needle, put some horse hair, or goat, or ox fiber on it along with strong thread; slightly bend the tip of the needle and insert partway into the fingernail, pierce through the entire needle, tie one end of the thread to the nail and extend upward, scrape off all hair near the edge where the nail meets its root and down to the skin, then cut any remaining piece in the base at the junction with a fine strip; ensure that by this incision, the body does not naturally produce tears as usual; never stretch just the nail or thread alone, but as we have said:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Ensure that the incision does not touch or break the soft tissue and nail bed, and that the nail is not pierced; after making the incision, apply a small amount of sealing wax, along with powder made from litargire (a substance used in old remedies), and leave it until the next day; then treat as required until healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	the saint li plague toi untie naistis de.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently lift the nail without being rough, and if you see that it does not diminish or hasten its healing, then drop juice from your mouth into an oil collar made of litargire and red wax resin mixed with flax, and apply the oil until the next day; then proceed to another work according to this same method, until it is completely cured.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then let it drain and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then proceed to the work as before, until it is also healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh on the edge is harmful by great damage in oil, suspend it with a thread and peel off part but not all, so that tears do not come to the wound; then drop into the red oil collar made of litargirotin.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	From the blow which strikes above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	The blows some men receive cause occasional redness, and it covers the pupil, pressing down on the eyelids, and turning inward. And so it is that the patient must lower their head to their chest, then work upon those eyes, curing all the veins suitable for this, and maintain them with force; then excise the first redness, and go through everything completely until the end, making sure you do not blink during treatment. And make the incision of the cataract as we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces of which one removes the eyelashes; just as this method shows after its demonstration.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all redness removed, apply oil of sweet marjoram or distilled rose water and similar corrosive medicines to the depression beneath it; and put cotton soaked with egg yolk there if you are sure of a hot abscess; if nothing remains, and the wound swells up again, and you doubt an acute abscuess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming agents. Then return to your treatment until it is healed, in this way redness is dispelled by this method from beneath the eye.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary for you to heal the weakness of each oil through natural ways and accidental methods in practice with iron; and do not place your hand into any of these practices until you see that this member has suffered from such a craft.
des voines des eulz	Of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Red veins that are covered with oil and hinder the sight of their craftsmanship and weaken it every day. Therefore, when you look at the oil in which sebel is present, if there is no other illness besides sebel; then do as follows: instruct the sick person to place his head on your chest, then suspend those veins throughout its entire length according to wisdom, and let them be twice as subtle according to this pattern:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two sores placed by degrees within one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you will apply the pressure carefully to those veins subtly, and let the blood flow out hour by hour until you see them removed from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil at the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at midday before the sun, being very zealous in your work so that you do not miss any veins; and when you have done this, let it bleed into the oil with a greenish-red color to corrupt what is lingering there.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot grasp it all in that hour, make a plaster with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave them untouched for several days until the pain is eased and assuredly free from inflammation, then continue as per this method stated before until they are healthy; and this is the form of strength.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fistula in the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Mirrors are called "arissati" fistules: when you treat it with cautery and hot ague medicine as I have before described, and if it is not healed, then perform the following operation on the abscess where it must die out, and draw all moisture from it until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	When the bone is exposed and you see decay and darkness, remove all instruments from which it takes its shape; it is called "sharp head", and made of iron in one piece with a pointed end, shaped like a file as seen below.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Place your hand on the decayed bone and twist it between both hands until you know that the decay has been resolved; do this several times, then restore its position with medicinal removers.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are swollen and the bowel is hardened, and it remains so for 40 days without recurring or becoming ulcerated, if there were no complications, know that it has healed; otherwise, there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to its original position according to this method: and first uncover the bone again with iron and medicinal agues, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this shape, and make the head of iron with three angles, and the shaft should be tapered up to the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the cheekbone and move your hand away a little, then turn all around until you pierce the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand against their neck; and then restore its original position with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the matter hardens and stiffens in the joints, proceed to the neck; this is an easier task for the sick person.
de l’issue de l’oil	To prevent a recurrence of dislocation from the arm's extremity.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones are completely dislocated and there is no distortion or narrowing of the neck, then you must tie up the patient; after that, cleanse it, and then apply cups or haterels to draw out without causing harm, followed by an application on the arm made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolum. Then stretch the arm, and place bandages above stitches with fabric; you must arrange the fabrics so that each piece is soft enough, and double it fourfold, then put one over another according to the amount needed by the limb; then strain through a leather strip folded in half, and resume cupping without causing harm; then remove the cups and leave the arm stretched day and night, and if the band is softened considerably, then you must untie it completely. Then remove the band after the day and night, and if you see the limb returning, that's good; but if not, resume the bandages, strainers, bands, cupping, and continue until healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The double falling of a cloth torn
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the double tearing of a cloth occurs, then it opens, and comes out with particles as if grains of resin, and is inevitable to see; then you cut off the area up to there where it ends above, then insert another needle at the root of that part down to the upper part; and pierce it through. Leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then sew together the double thread from that part lower down, tie a portion around the wound, hold it tightly, then extract the needle and place a soft cloth generously therein; leave until the threads fall out with the wound, then treat with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never does the wound remain confined by the wound each part of a circle of fabric, until it's healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a large appearance, pierce at the subtle spot which appears just below the wound, and follow the white-ish moisture descending into the eye socket, and enter it quickly; then extract as soon as possible until healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bow of the elbow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease known as "alcunnati" is not caused by an eyebrow that appears to be falling like water but isn't; the appearance of its operation is such that you make the patient sit on a properly arranged seat and upright, then take his head between your hands with two parts, and move it until you see the brow coming up toward your eyes; then have it inserted, and do not let it down or unravel the threads, and observe the patient as usual; if they don't come down, understand that it is water, and if the construction of the eyebrow isn't properly arranged as we have said, make them sit between your hands, then use a delicate spatula over the horny skin near the crown, continuing with the conjunctive until the brow rises; and when it has risen, let water infused with honey or boiled fenugreek and honey be poured into the eye, then cure as usual until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have observed similarities to water in the division; and what is necessary for cutting; thus according to health considerableness. It should be done that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, shielded from light by the sun, and apply a good amount of medicated ointment; then place the paper with the ointment on your left hand if the eye is located to the left or on your right hand if the eye is located to the right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is located to the left, an instrument called 'almagda', or with your left hand if it's located to the right; and place the tip of the instrument near the crown by a length equal to a stick at that edge of the oil where it meets the lesser outer corner, then insert the instrument forcefully named 'almagda', and twist your hand until you pierce through in the oil's outer corner, feeling that almagda comes into the emptied space; and it should be such that the depth of the almagda path is to the width of the empty space from the prunelet to its end at the black spot; this is the crown of the oil. You will see bone in the paper due to the whiteness of the horned edge, then place the instrument up to where the water is and express it with another method afterward. If the water flows out now, you will see before yourself and the instrument in his ointment.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting for a bit, and the water rises through the second pathway, place the wool with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise any further, gently twist almagda around your hand little by little; then put some gemstone oil back into the eye inwardly. Then apply oiled gauze or linen soaked in rose oil and abundant of egg whites, and mix with medicated oil. And we, and those from our time, place comfrey poultice with an abundance of egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	cont the nud Marcude; s.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then carefully puncture the joint only slightly, not too deeply, but make a very fine hole, then apply an emollient as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient an appropriate resting place where he can sleep on his back in a dark area; ensure all movements are light, give him easy foods, do not move his head to either side or up, keep him lying according to his natural position until three days have passed; then release him from that same dim room and check his vision, allow him to see various things, then reattach the ligaments for seven more days; it is not necessary to perform this during the hour of the procedure or immediately after incision, but you must do so because the swelling rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess occurs, remove the dressing on the seventh day, and provide care for the area that soothes the abscess; and once it is calmed, reopen his vision and place a bandage over his face to cover any days, and he should stay in that dim room. And then gradually leave the dark house, and he will return to himself; know that no novices should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And all those that one may be found in our ground from therein, and often comes the paiant to ce estoie que tu esprue de qu'il qui les mord leis poinde l’on seintaindont li cist li vient ait ons ne ire.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the forms of almagda because those who do not recognize them see them as such; and they are properly called arrows.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	They are heads with the same subtlety, and three corners sharply angled.
de la char sor le neis	from the chariot beside the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	ou f the b O; so that they do mainda; a bon tred; and t la c
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there remains any substance that cannot be removed, apply all the fine subtle remedies lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if it swells or forms an abscess, treat as appropriate; and if malignant abscesses are present, cauterize quickly until they are cleansed and the bones are fully exposed, then pour oil, honey, water, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the treatment fails and moisture reaches the palate, ensure it is sane (not infected); if the moisture does not perforate as necessary, suspect that there are teeth in the bone above, which prevents remedies from working: then it is time to insert a slightly thick linen thread, held firmly between our fingers with a small space; place the patient's head under the end of the filament as much as possible and pull gently until it comes out through the mouth; this method is often used for children in schools and is easy for those who perform it; then hold one part that emerges from the nostril with one hand, and the other part that emerges from the mouth with the other hand, ensnaring each alternately as we do with our fingers. Do so until you know the moisture has expelled all the material causing obstruction, then extract the thread, remove any blood, and treat it with Egyptian ointment before reinserting it into the nostril as before; continue for three days or more, until the ointment dissolves everything that remained. Then place a linen bandage in the nostril for several days until healed, and use dry medicines if needed; this is the method to purge the head, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Et sise de lait un chef dun le chef et ausne de, se oevre les cheualie c'on li oe une estremes à croist: adle, si comest li chiés a sai telle chier quoi on neis chief a, ce ou li. Et les mainture; et aloche tu ; siequolli que se diech escomme l’on de la meravez les qui cheur oe cuit duce chef une che le unle pous chiue ce est de. Et les anque dulles ne, mais li tient cheis iustes eues et.
de la char sor le neis	Of a chariot over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the forehead, which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, one must begin by cutting it out completely, then applying strong ointments or hot medicines. If you delay doing so until it becomes large, be wary if it feels hard, has a reddish color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an incurable boil; for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the sore is sensitive to touch but does not have a reddish hue, you can see that it may be completely cauterized. Then empty the abscess without fear, and heal dry and constricting things therein.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut or injured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous wounds, it is not very useful in any man. Therefore, when this occurs, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then join the two edges together and treat until healed; and if the edges are torn apart on either side, trim all parts of their skin as they heal, then rejoin the two edges together, bind tightly, and powder over powdered dragon's blood, and incense finely ground; and place the powders under a piece of frankincense from strong or other frankincense, leaving it until pus exudes on its own, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suture is that you assemble the closure: with needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When at home the abscess becomes hard like grains of pepper, both smaller and larger; then you must cut the edges, make incisions on either side, grasp with forceps and apply it to each part; afterwards place a poultice after vitriol incision, until the wound is healed; and then bandage it loosely, and treat the area drying until it becomes healthy.
de la char des gencives	From the decay of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often there is decay on the gums which the ancients called «albulus»; if it needs to be supported with pincers, and applied at its root, and let bleeding occur from the wound or blood; then apply a poultice of vitriol powder or other restraining and desiccating substances; and if that decay returns after incision, and often happens again, repeat the cauterization: it does not return after this treatment; these are the methods to heal ulcers.
des sordens	of soreness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At no time are they assembled at the top of the gums, within the mouth between the gums, with ugly and sharp scabs; and never do their teeth turn black and greenish-yellow until corruption comes to the gums, and their breath becomes foul; if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his eyes are in your hand, and remove any gum or scabs found, so long as there is nothing left behind; and thus do blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other discolorations until they come to light; and if anything taken for the first reason is good, it is well; if not, begin again on the second day and third, until you have completely removed them all; and know that teeth need various forms of treatments to heal, according to what the work shows, because the razor from which one removes the gums has different shapes than those used between the gangs; and these shapes and others are with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating the tooth's pain that you delay the extraction as long as possible, because it should not be done too hastily; for it is a substance so high until there is no reason left for removal.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the patient is constrained by pain in drawing, it must be ensured that you are certain about which tooth aches. Often the pain troubles the patient and they think it's a healthy or holy tooth, and extract the bad tooth; nevertheless, the pain does not depart for this reason alone until the evil is removed, as we have already done so with these saints; and when you are well certain about which tooth aches, it must be scraped around the tooth completely and strongly to protect the gum from all sides; then move it back using your fingers or fine pincers in small increments until properly aligned, then firmly secure the tenaille; and let the head of the shoulder be placed in its proper place between thy knuckles, ensuring it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these emetics and blow into each part lightly, then move it as you did initially. And if the gums are pierced and mixed, it is necessary that you fill them with rags where there are tears; and when pulled out subtly by tenaille, make sure not to break while pulling out; work skillfully around the gum to cleanse the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Et al les nes tu estrains par ceue, li a la reine, puisque prise au quinti cesmant et ce m, que nos avons rente li brisent quant sire la chenu, de bonde, qui les le vues i ou entreez. Et cestirent, si que soient laste tu meil reit si tue il estes.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the strands, to which one moves the fingers first, have long points and thick branches, not doubling when you pull on the thread; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large members such that they do not bend while pulling, and made of well-forged iron, with teeth to grip tightly.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the fingers
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out through these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a tongs-like tool.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root springs from it, that is good; if not, use all the instruments, as these forms come after this.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument which has two handles, here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments used for examining the gums, and this instrument that appears to be large pincers, its form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument must not break; there are many instruments for examining the gums; also other instruments that are uncounted; and wise masters discover by themselves their instruments, according to their treatments and the diseases they show, because there are different maladies where the old did not teach any instrument due to variety among them. And it does not break on the carriage or the other bones when affected, but if you seek the instruments that I have mentioned, here is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	They must be large and firmly hold the bone without slipping but can remove it; then restore to its place with appropriate medicines for that condition, and if there is decay in the bone which is small, you have all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not in their natural place and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, one must discern if the nerve is behind the tooth and not properly positioned, and cannot be moved or filed down; then scrape with a tool. And if it is bent together with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is shown here, similar to a small beak, made of iron hook sharp at one end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And grasp the tool gently over several days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others; and if it is visible that it can be filed, shape it as shown here with part of this filing instrument.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is as with the filing of needles; and file the tooth gently over several days until it becomes smooth; then in the end grind it completely flat, without any rough edges, and if the nerve is too sharp and bleeds into the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is level, so that it does not bleed into the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth become loose due to shaking or falling out, and the patient cannot bite properly on what they chew without it coming out, treat them with medicines that contract but do not help; if necessary, restrain them with a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and corrode over time, while gold does not change at all. The wire should be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; if you see that they are pointing towards each other, take a doubled wire between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends in between them so that it covers any missing or additional teeth completely until reaching the sound tooth on the opposite side. Then continue covering up to where you started and gently pull your hand backward without movement; securely hold near the root of the loose tooth so that it cannot escape. Cut off the wire ends with pliers, reattach them between the healthy teeth, and position them so they do not catch on the tongue. Then leave the gap as narrow as possible for as long as it can stay in place; if it loosens or breaks, restrain with another wire; it will remain stable this way throughout its duration, ensuring proper alignment of the teeth and shape after reattaching the two healthy and missing teeth:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, reset it back into place as freshly as we have described; and do not involve anyone who is not skilled and patient in this procedure, nor shape it like a wild boar's tooth, but put it where it belongs according to its absence, and restrain as previously explained, allowing it to remain there for an extended period.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of a boil of the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	At no time is there this kind of swelling that arises from the tongue or nature, such as we do not treat in this way; or by accident of burned wound. The treatment is done so you work on the mouth with the patient's head held upright, and lift the tongue; then cut the ligamentous nerve wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there are hardness or lumps present, it is of a burned wound, so put in the probe and cut the ligament as wide. Be sure that the incision is not too deep for the artery beneath; and once done, raise the head with rose water and ease, or cold water, then place a linen tent underneebythe tongue; and treat the eye nightly so it cannot close. And if there are signs of bleeding, put vitriol paste on top of the wound; and if blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow-burning caustic that is effective in this way; then use other remedies until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of a color or black or hardened, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it as it is cancer; and if there's discharge like pus, apply onion juice and then use an unguent to dissolve it from both sides; and if it still persists after your initial treatment, put vitriol paste until healed. Then return to the previous method of treating until you finish everything thoroughly; then raise the head with water and salt, and treat with other remedangs as long as they are sane.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	At no time do gobbles come into the throat called "godath," and they are properly referred to as two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, take care: if they are small abscesses with a soft and colored core, do not touch them with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either for their bleeding to subside; but let it remain until it dies, and then you shall cut it off, or it may rupture by itself; and if it is a pale color and the roots are slender, prepare the instrument for cutting, but firstly observe whether the abscesses rest calmly and have subsided. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun with their head upright, and they shall work on the mouth and insert the rod between their hands, pressing the tongue down from all sides; and it should be made of silver or fine copper as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with this instrument entirely and see if there is an abscess? Then take a needle and insert it into the almond, and pull the pus above as much as possible; and do not touch anything else with wool. After that, wrap the head of the instrument (which appears like one force) with wool:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument with you, use tongs of which this form is:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it has a sharp and blunt side; and when you have captured one of the almonds with the cap, capture the other in the same manner, then after making an incision gargle the patient's mouth with hot water, vinegar, and herbs to stop bleeding if it occurs, then again gargle with warm water or cooked quince seeds, myrtle leaves, etc., until the wound is healed; And no other abscesses should appear in the throat except for these two almonds, so capture them accordingly as you did with the first.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	qle bon CXX.
de l’uve	From of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the retina descends to the eye and becomes detached and elongated, it should be called "perpendicular"; if it is still thick and round after being cut as we have previously described in the division, and the surgery does not help, and you see that the wound heals and appears delicate, then you must excise; and those that are rounded and not long should also be excised. If they are sanguineous or of a flesh color or black, it is necessary to make an incision at this point because there is great risk for the patient. Therefore, when you see them according to the manner I have described, concerning their position and length, seat the sick person in front of the sun and press their tongue with the instrument we previously mentioned; then insert the needle into the eye, pull downward, and excise at one or two of the points that I have mentioned for the incision of the two almonds. It is necessary to not excise beyond the natural termination; if you excises more, it will harm their voice and speech; after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the two almonds and heal until it is healthy again. If the sick person fears being cauterized, then it is necessary to use a device for the sensation they are afraid of during cauterization. The manner of this cautery is with sharp vinegar-like fluid. And ensure that the patient places his head in your lap and then presses their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or chisel of cautery, and confine it with a vinegar solution so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and apply this pressure using the shape I described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here comes le coupsus la medicine si tu n’est li recoupe la medicin lesmede. Pou replei. Est parle the medicine, tant ceut la a lune. Tu ardide la mire enlucie cite lesquarre de le mieux est dude la medecel et d’elle le ouste tu la garnes ce li recu.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective with incision than with the cautery; if it's treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and yellow yarrow and origanum (oregano) and rue and chamomile and avronne (avranle) and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of these into a pot. Then make easy boiling; and the pots should be well stuck with strong clay, and within the pot there should be an instrument inserted as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it should be of silver or brass, and one end inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapors ascend to the eyes until they are suffused; repeatedly resume when the vapor dries out, and ensure not to start this at the onset of a hot abscess as many things can happen. And do not insert it only when there is a decline in the heat of an abspect. And if this instrument isn't present, take some cloth and put inside its head a feather from an ostrich, so that the patient's mouth doesn't become too hot; because the ostrich feather does not weigh down the vapor on the face, and it is a good cure together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	of the following text is a medieval French, around 12th-13th centuries.:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the strum be bent towards the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head upwards; and watch to not touch the epiglottis, for if all goes well, do not push in any bone inside; move as needed so the patient places the instrument, because where it is less dense; then blows out of the mouth or pulls forcefully with the entire instrument evenly until it is done.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the obstruction of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Medicine is never in vain if I have said it in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when they do not help at all, then look into the throat with the patient towards the sunlight, and press their tongue against the instrument as I told you. And if you see an obstruction, squeeze out everything through a small pin or delicate pincers that are suitable for this; and if it does not work, take a large needle, blow into the throat of the patient, then insert a hot iron in the needle frequently. And when the patient has fever all day, then fill a glass with cold water, and work on the mouth, pouring it in little by little until they can swallow; move as needed often with their hand; and if the obstruction feels the liquid, it will go out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with aromatic incense using the instrument mentioned in uve fumigation; do this many times, for it will eventually yield results. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot filled with charcoal and cover it with a perforated cloth inserted into a container; then pour your fumigation there, have the patient place their head in the vessel's mouth and close it so smoke does not escape but fills the space. Now the suffocation will occur, and if it does not come out, restart the fumigatur by many times; let the patient suffer thirst and consume dirty things such as sour milk, and do not drink water; then eventually they must be brought out using this method of treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used for suffocation is such that when it can be seen, it resembles bent pincers to enter into the throat; and it has a shape like a doctor's spoon, with roughness of sand so that whatever it takes in cannot escape. And here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The form of this instrument, which resembles surgical forceps, equipped with abrasions on the edges; and has a sharp points for grasping or holding tissues:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, as our memory brings forth from one and another in this book, and they are different by perforation and cutting; there are two ways of dealing with them, the first being similar to itself, because it holds moisture. The second manner is for boils that appear on the body. For abscesses on the head are unlike those at the base, and abscesses in a swollen joint are unlike those that occur in joints, each having its own judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if to an abscess one must not pierce until it is fully healed according to its completion; and for those which require piercing when they are ripe, but do not die with their completion, as in the case of abscesses near joints. For when abscessamoins occur near joints, if left to mature entirely by chance, there may be corruption of the ligament and nerve of the joint causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near a principal member, then delaying piercing until it has fully healed will harm the principal member; or if near the foundation, one should not pierce except when it is ripe; and do not pierce an abscess before digestion is complete, unlike those near the foundation that swell entirely and become internal fistulas, nor can they be cured in a significant manner.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must you pierce the abscess; and so is heu leu percedez maintes et se la semblanz est douces leu, et lorant ors lesperit dument eus li percerte, et ne doit lou lecumbre le pierre.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases where there is swelling in that limb. And when abscesses are located within the flesh, it should be left to undergo complete digestion before you puncture them, as we have said. For if you pierce them too soon, they will become filled with much filth and remain unclean; and sometimes their lips and depths may harden. And for any abscesses that are perceived along the wide expanse of the body, according to what part needs it. It is necessary to drain small abscesse
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those without a head, if the abscess is superficial like an abdomynfly one, you should pierce it directly; and for large abscesses with great swelling and bubbling, puncture it but do not drain all of the pus at once, then apply dressing to the wound until the next day, then don't add anything further. Repeat this process gradually over time until the bubbling is gone; especially if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, small children, or elderly men with frail constitutions. Because sometimes the pus will spurt out as it drains from the abscess, which could lead to the death of the patient, so be cautious when treating this condition. Avoid using these techniques carelessly, and after identifying an abscess, cleanse the wound; and check if the size of the abscess is small; and if it's a simple cut, prepare pads from old linen or cotton; and for large abscesses with many openings, place pads in each one so they touch each other; and if you have punctured part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old cotton or cloth scraps without moisture, then bind it until the third day; afterwards remove it and apply medicinal salve until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	, alstroy est toun ;mba cema (sple:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is how it should be generally known in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must go before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of swellings
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	A small abscess may occur on the head, and it is treated in the manner of sheep dags (scabs), as well as a goat's knees; there are many similarities. Some have moisture like hair and others are hard to pull off at the root, without any doubt if they cause discomfort. And the operation of cutting on the scalp is such that one feels with every instrument called "entromissor", which forms a cavity afterwards containing whatever it holds. If there is moisture inside, it escapes from below; and when the moisture has been drained, scrape without leaving anything in the hair that contains the moisture, as it returns again if left untouched; then insert cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and soap, and apply to the wound until the next day. Then begin with the same cotton on the second day, and continue daily, ensuring that there is no delay during the night; then treat the wound with an appropriate ointer until it heals completely. And if a fatty lump remains from the abscess, wrap around lengthwise; insert needle-like stitches, remove all sides, and apply your treatment thoroughly as though milking leather or any other substance that is placed on it; and if tendons are causing problems, do what I have instructed you to do afterwards. And similarly treat an abscess whether it is hard (scabbed over), and the lanced area as well as cutting away tissue and soaking in a solution of water or soap.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the incisions of abscesses and pus-filled wounds are easier, for they have less blood. And if any of these abscesses or chiefs do not have moisture, and some of them I made heads from an old woman; and found an abscess as hard as a stone, rough and bloody, which could not be broken open; and had one struck it, the cut would have been just like that made by a stone. In other abscesses coming to chiefs, such as those that come at the heads of children and root ends of ears, they should always be opened to their full depth daily so pus may exit; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	Scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Scrofula is a type of swelling or abscesses often occur on the neck, and under the shoulders, and armpits, and there are many times they come elsewhere in the body but nowhere else, and similar to other parts of the head, as we have said; and the symptoms these scrofula. There is one that contains moisture, and so has malignant which do not want health. In those cases then, and are visible signs at good disposition on touching it appears at the place where you see but obvious to the body of color as in course; and neither near nerves nor arteries or windpipe is through that throat pipe nor be too much so close them all, if you're: thus do not close and open so far as he does not are. And it well closed just a bit at with little by little time, then they the more;
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work there, then apply vitriol paste to the wound, or any powders that prevent bleeding, and bind the wound; leave it until the abscess is calmed and softened, beginning to decay. And when the blood has ceased flowing, return to your task until completed; if after this small cysts appear, remove them and cleanse. If there's a large vein in the root of the scrofula, do not cut out that scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, let it hang without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and hold them together so that there is no excess due to its size. If it needs to be covered at the root, drain well and bind as we have said. Those scrofulae with excess, puncture where you deem fit; and pierce in a similar manner as previously mentioned, then treat the area with ointment and related things so that they decay from corruption; and when the wound is thoroughly cleansed, cure it with healing salve until healthy.
de squinance	And if you cut out any scrofula, puncture, where as mentioned to be treated well before afore drain likewise salve of health from purge and similar ointment after the area is thoroughly cleansed with infection heal until fully. And when it pus exits cure so they are inh:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The elders spoke and wrote about the treatment of throat ailments; however, I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have swelling, it is necessary that the cut in the throat called "epiglute" be cleared; and this cannot be treated by urine, because all veins and the main part of the sickness are present with abscesses high up in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	When we wish to split the epiglottis, it must be divided from three or four circles, a small slit across, between two circles or by the quantity of the incision into the sac.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those that are prone to bleeding when cutting into the epiglottis should have no veins, and vessels should be long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, it should be stretched with a gorge cloth to the full length, then cut until reaching the windpipe; avoid vessels of blood, and if you see anything else, excise the abscess as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the section of the throat's vein that burst forth from a rupture at its place and due to the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leaves an open wound uncovered for a time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time of doubt about strangulation has passed, gather together the two lips of the wound on the cheek, and sew it all tightly so that there is no gap; then apply remedies which make fresh flesh grow until it heals well.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	line; Much; the acute f (et la:l're the said pard. If heu; ça ben tret na morte.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then seal the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus avoiding death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And so they command the physician to leave the wound open until the illness is passed, and it passes in three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	Then they instructed to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I shall tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden stab herself with a knife in her throat and cut off part of the larynx.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	que loe them e t les so tre.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood was issuing from it; moreover, it seemed well that it had not consumed any bone or conducted a vein except for the throat, as life flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I quickly stitched up the wound and treated it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there occurred to the lady only that her voice became hoarse, and afterwards she returned to my care.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	On this treatment of the epiglottis, I tell you it must have no fear.
de la grosse gorge	In the throat's large entrance
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	with p and liquer sofla: ould; t; Jambal ket que theyr that you met. Tantairesse ce est la pe Cler; OUD to m the t untous ils. If heuiesle ;that le t, et on te ou.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; or natural causes have no remedy.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental cases are of two ways: one is similar to our fatigue and the other way resembles an abscess coming from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not suffice to work on major vessels but only in the small ones, and tries and searches everything thoroughly.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it like our flesh and not causing any pain, then bandage it as we would with wounds, and treat the whole head of the injury, if there are points.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And examine thoroughly, and heal it as needed until it is completely well again.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	lignant;  (le et he. Don't combte marcent f vile, and le crotre. And also: th: Ca bon ils contes; if the cor:l corsne te la;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now I must explain all the differences between them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is fevers and heat-stricken, as long as the boiling point has not passed, and decomposition is complete; then the fever subsides and the heat lessens.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With ours [oursed], there is no fever or pain, and it contains a pus (exudate), which is its own sac and follows the color of the body, beginning as if glassy, and grows.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	heu; that are the t, so far lesse ; it is the in the said they must beau the  (orniher, or not-Tes: f much the other : s, and to make a. The UCC form.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat the wound, that you first try and examine all the instrument called "entre-miseroire," according to its form or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of examining abscesses is that you squeeze or make it more moist than what you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your two fingers, until you know that the pus has reached its head, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entre-miseroire, and be careful so it does not slip out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the running moisture is of such color as mentioned with other boils, then do it similarly.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the incision no moisture comes forth and it appears greasy, then treat it crosswise, using forceps on each side, carefully scraping off each part, and preserving the coat where it lies to make it clean with a knife.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot cleanse it completely, then cut into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	l'segniu se c1 ydes que ne the:
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lingers a bit and the pain increases, apply an ointment of corrosive herbs to the wound, tighten the wound, and place soothing substances on the abscess until healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If it is severe, cut out the two edges of the wound and treat with what relieves thirst.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If the wound is inflamed or something else if you hasten and apply a lead of vitriol paste, leave it for two or three days until the swelling subsides, and let bleeding rest; then return to cooking what has been left undone.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	See here the forms of intrusive tumors, and they are in three ways: large and medium and small; and there are three zones which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three ways to encircle abscesses of fistulas: large, medium, and small.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are similar to the needles used for witchcraft, made of citrine, iron or silver, and those that move value as yellow ones, which are better tested with dark black material to surround abscesses of fistulas.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the size of openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and some that have two protrusions in three different ways.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and those that have three protrusions in all three ways; and those that have two protuberances, one only, and are also of three ways; and all these must be in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these that are cut are sharp, and there are some where they do not sever only one side, which we scrape the skin off because we cannot clip the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these dislocations are reset with fingers, so that the patient does not expose themselves at the onset of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see them;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And it is used near there, and limbs, and also similar things.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Et souvent il en vient un outil petit, semblable à des lambeaux d’ongles, ainsi qu'en ceci : pour attacher le sang.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	Et cela se fait une seule fois à l’endroit sain où les veines sont ligotées, et aux artères, ainsi que par cette grande méthode : pour les recoudre.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Pas une seule fois gonfle-t-elle des seins d'hommes qui commencent à être corrompus, jusqu'à ce qu'ils ressemblent aux seins d'une femme ;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And they stay swollen and painful, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be done according to this form of the following line: b. Jusqu'à g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape the fatty tissue, and dress the wound with medicinal salve, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and continue until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and the wound is bent downward, and softened due to its size, as it happens in women, so that they form two rib-like structures above, by two similar splits.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	The reason one holds the other at the end of each, so that the larger contains the smaller according to this form, from line b. to line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the leather between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, as well as anything else necessary for treatment, until it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not clean, or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with a pounded cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leaves it until it fully rejoins and fuses with fat, then treats it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	For abscesses in the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And when it often during times evacunet les plaies dule esproves blood and healess on l'est à toi sances sont asseles plies la veue de isles estires, as muches de cuer of snes, et doles tisemples:
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line B to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess have been emptied, apply a woolen cloth to the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove all the wool and treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles swellings like we have said of groin sores, treat it by making incisions as we have described for groin sores before; and if the wound contains bowels, then perform cautery as we have described earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the dislocation of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, there are often abscesses and also bleeding from veins.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if you touch near when this is for the artery, so it comes that the abscesses are large in size.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	When you feel it on your elbows, there is intense strain; and when it's by the vein, reason for fear appears.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to cope with this abscess, especially when it's under ligaments and tendons and at the joint and in many other places, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Thus it is necessary to remove the iron treatment, and those who are at the head should also be treated similarly, and in those who have an inflammaturature over the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	; They are said.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle on one side, and pierce it all the way to the opposite side, and tie off the artery with a double thread for two inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are at the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then mark the place which is between the two ties with a probe until you find where it bleeds, and then sever the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then prepare the dressing that I will instruct you to apply, as long as the wound continues to ooze.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply an ointment to the area as needed until it heals.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if an abscess is present for the size of the vein, it's necessary to treat with your hand the ointment as much as possible on the abscess throughout the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle under the skin that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and let there be a double thread, so that you can pull from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	they merclavestroit. If the t s; if the same: it le pas as (e, so that you should be pletise sez; the them, and e ceda.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	If you doubt that the child is not cured, then replace with another needle at all along one of the threads from underneath the abscess to the incision made by the first needle, and strain the threads in four directions.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then close the abscess as long as excesses persist, then cut away the excess fat and leave what remains attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and salves until they are healed.
des apostemes des ners	From boils to nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, they become abscesses of nerves when injured or due to excessive labor.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This occurs often in shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, it is .i. grievous abscess, its appearance resembles the body's color, and it causes pain in various ways.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	: de laisssa they are not ce way.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And be well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints should never be bound with iron: lest it may cause constriction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And he who is at the head or forehead causes swelling of the scalp to the parietal bone.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, use forceps and dress them at their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	puro:lum.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	At no time does it occur in wombs or elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its appearance like dough, with subtle roots, and large stems; there are both small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a house where there were two wombs that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no differences between them, they were white in color, had fine roots, were split open, and oozed moisture within.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	the ttcere ;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the swelling at the spatulatum is large, and be in your presence the fire cautery. For on cutting often comes great bleeding of blood, and if it does not stop, then quickly provide the caustic treatment.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	If you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and bind the wound as we have said, leaving it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then the binding, and continue to strain with the thread until the wound is closed, and it will heal; and if the roots are thick, be fearful of cutting through them completely in one go, but do well cut off most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then burn it so that it does not re-dislocate; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the torn tissue which is of a sickly color, poor feeling, and milk white appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an ulcer that has hardened, and I shall come to the treatment of this syphilitic sore hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when there are boils or furuncles
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	by the t. S (aguni colore tostrord and: they do not.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When it is due to the rupture of the seam and through an abscess opening, then its color resembles that of the body's color, and is easily evacuated without pain from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the outflow of the intestine, then there are many variations, and when pressed on its sides it bursts open, and then returns, and sometimes becomes hardened, greatly expanding at the entrance of the bowel and requiring vigorous work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is an easy matter, and opens well when pressed with your hand, without constriction; and if it is for blood, then the abscess will be large and hard, protruding according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for swelling, then the area should be tender-touched, and the procedures are such that you must observe whether the appearance is due to blood of an artery or vein, or swelling.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary to leave the wound as is. For there is doubt and fear, just as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to soak his armlet and stretch it out straight, then tie a string around the entire belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then command it to lie on its side between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the area you have marked with all the spatula.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then extend the bulk of the abscess above all the large hooks;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	the formente la pest ce:
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work on the extended abscess on the ligament, insert your index finger, and feel for the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the ligament, release it, and push the intestine towards the navel of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find swelling, catch it with the hook, and remove any excess tissue.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	I, with ca f on:
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess into four points above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and let it remain in place until healed, and extract the dead tissue by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or cut when it is thin and ripe enough, then treat as required, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract any blood or pus you find, then treat the wound as required, and close the wound.
dou chancre	Of a carbuncle
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division about chancres resembling certain things, and how one should treat them with medicine, and bleed using leeches; let us speak of chancre starting in the joints, requiring great caution during treatment, and as per ancient sources, if a chancre is present or can be removed like one found under the nipples, in the groin, or on the thighs, it should be completely excised at the beginning; and when they are large and old, there is no need to approach them, for I have never known anyone healed from them before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the operation is present or can be excised as we have said, purge the patient of black bile once; then provide a good resting place for the operation to perform the procedure; then apply onion poultices or chancres and cut off all hairs and tissue from any part, leaving nothing behind; let it bleed fully, squeeze out well onto your hand or something else, and if the progression of blood causes contrary to the incision in the vein or artery, cauterize until they are sealed; then perform another treatment till healing occurs.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	In our discussion on the division of dropsy symptoms, we have discussed how water accumulation occurs in the body and its manifestations. We also talked about each type's signs and treatments with medicines or iron; it is only when they are evident. One should not use iron for these two types: tympanites and hyposarcosis, as this can be fatal. So if you medicate a symptom of dropseia called 'eclites' with medicine but the cure does not work, check to see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy; for instance, gastrointestinal issues and other similar conditions; do not use iron as there may be doubts. And if you see a very strong patient who only suffers from dropsy without any other disease and they are neither too young nor too old, then proceed in this manner:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Gently lift the patient's hands, and let the minister press their belly, pushing the water to the lowest part near the groin. Then take a spatula made of two pointed parts as follows: And it should be sharp on both ends, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if dropsy is originating from the intestines: if it requires that you make an incision above the elbow, three fingers' width straight down from over the wrist; and if dropsy stems from liver disease, make your incision on the left of the bend, three fingers' width; and if it is from kidney issues, do so to the right, ensuring that no excesses flow towards a weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the hide with your instrument and empty it, then lift your hand to remove all fat between the hide and flesh just as when scraping for an amount of a thumbnail or slightly more; then pierce the flesh until the space reaches eight fingers in width, this is where the water lies, followed by the blood vessels, and you insert the tool with which it resembles: And it's like a silverfish thin, made of iron wire or copper lightweight, with an opening on its underside; one hole at the top end, three holes on each side, and one in the center. It has head cut as if a pen, and this is how authors carve their pens:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the head above is the membrane, so when tension comes to water, it should be suspended on the instrument; then drain most or one-third of it, because if you drain more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon's impact.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	However, in emptiness according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the conditions of the patient's strength mean, and their hairs; then use the instrument and retain water, which is now held open by the key that blocks the passage above the sack, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	However, on the following day, and keep from fanning until it does not remain but just some water. And if you have doubts about the patient, and leave too much water, then treat with burial or hot sand, and by a lot of sweating or bathing and in the sun, and dye with drink; and cure with dry medicines until he is healthy again, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	For prevention of erection
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	At no time are children born without any foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or not in its place. If it needs to be done quickly so that a slender piece can be pierced: then attach a very fine cord to it, and tie it up as such for three or four days; and when he needs to urinate, untie the knot, allowing him to urinate, and then re-tie; but sometimes this is not necessary because the urine that comes out does not retract.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the foreskin is small, then it should be treated with a medicine of linen swabs as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are falsely attached because no one is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, which means they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the testicles, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this procedure is that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the penis and the scrotum similarly to the size of a pen, so that the foreskin can be cut away as needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, then apply the sealant that stops the flowing blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Of pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come these swellings in the penis, and there is an ugly appearance of wounds; among them are malignant and benign ones; it is necessary to pluck them with a fine needle, then cleanse and purify all, then cover with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat with refined oil until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the swellings are malignant, of pus color and discharging, it is necessary to treat with fire caustery. After you have cleaned them, and if the swelling is within the skin and partially outside, remove the swelling that is inside first; afterward, attend to what is outside. For when you treat both together, ensure the head of the penis does not become perforated, and blackness and decay come into its place; it is necessary to heal all that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and vinegar, then treat with other remed groves until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	If bleeding occurs, arrange the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery serves two purposes together - for stopping blood flow and preventing decay. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you insert or guide a piece of lead in the penis and urinate among those who are ill; and when the hairs at the top of the penis become hard due to these issues for wounds or abscesses in those who have not been circumcised, then it is necessary to scrape them off with an instrument made of steel until the ties are loosened and the head of the penis freed from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then scrape the spatula slightly on the head of the penis and hairs; afterward, carefully separate them, and place a subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water over it that it does't become completely dry.
de la circoncision	On circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not necessarily a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and properly for children, it must be done the best way, and in the easiest manner for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision between one day and three days, and at all times; they were buried with two sheets, and occasionally, the coffin was placed above and below the body.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it recovers with copper, and the pain is doubled, and at the disfigurement which is hard to assure are not the tips of the member; and at the manicuring of the nail by chance slips away the iron, causing infection, and many times arise thus there is no need for further treatment as I have observed.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the manicuring done with force throughout all parts of the line I have found the benefit of experimentation, for the forces cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, trim evenly throughout .i. all strands; but that the threads are well straightened around the skin; and make the first operation in such a way that it appears to the child (if he understands), that you do not tie him tightly with the thread only on the penis, and then let him move freely in any way that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then the head is supported between your hands straight up, and it reappears as forces return to your hands or from under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the straps. Afterwards, put your hand on the rod and blow or cough, and draw it up until the head of the rod is aligned; then cleanse well of the filth assembled therein, then secure the socket with a double thread, then tie it from one protrusion to another linkage; and hold as two fingers by the second linked at the pouchet and index finger, making sure to cover between the two links. Then lift the cork gently and realign the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then allow the blood to leak slightly and steadily, as it is a woman's issue; and apply powder above and below the powder, with a small cloth bound by an egg yolk cooked in lukewamoistened rose oil, mixed with fresh rosemary oil, and leave it there until the following day, treating it with another treatment as necessary until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces in cleansing is this: both eyes are held and made sharp, and they should be as large as possible.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	If the issue of inflammation is when the kernel inside escapes during incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so too does the head make an abscess; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold by your fingernail, then with tweezeboarers, and thereafter bandage.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three days, and that which is from beneath the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess has soothed; gently scrape it off; bandage as you move, and protect the area of the rod, for it will not do harm in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore heal the sudden wounds of powder that we have mentioned in treating powders, and if you bandage too much, and it goes beyond, it will not harm; heal as we have said until they are healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or foreign matter, which we have discussed in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not expelled, and you see that retention due to a stone lodged in or near the bladroid, then it is proper for the patient to be bent on their elbangs (elbows); and their feet should be placed under the back, stretching out the belly towards the upper back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and thus, one constrains the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	the ld but in t.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method for urine flow is that you take a double thread and tie it to the tip of a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert the end with the thread into the syringe; trim any excess wool or cotton and fill the syringe up to its top with it, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and mastic resin, and have the patient sit on a seat, and apply oil-soaked urine and olive oil as well as watered down pitch to their bladder and penis;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then carefully insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then wrap the penis around with a double layer towards the bladcuft; then fill the syringe up to the bladder and let the patient feel urine flowing back from there, and this is not done in this order because that is how the conduit twists; then remove the thread little by little until all the wool remains, allowing urine to follow the remaining wool, then extract it;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are wounds or blood in the bladder, and decay has gathered there, and you see it needs to be cleansed with waters and medicines, so do all on the instrument called "clenched fist". And this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is sealed, and has .iii. openings: two on one side and one on the other as you see; and a receptacle over which the medicine channel passes well to spray out the seed without addition, so that we may drain the moisture and insert when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	t c (don't se c. Joles entre. And the comm: by pa jumlemente f the durnt that cirez; if they est de leur.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	This is the form of subtle clysters used to cleanse the bladder: so it is here.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	It is made of silver or copper and the head is higher; then from one shoulder a band breaks loose. Then take an ox-hide bladder and put in it the moisture you intend to use for cleansing the bladbean, then tie it between the two well-formed breasts with a good double thread, and heat some of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the clyster into the phallus, then strain your hand on the bladder until the patient feels that all the moisture has reached the bladdern.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is made of the piece avec li pren .i liens qu’il est d'accompanment puis qui li chausse vues, et ce cest lee fai les boute l’oiles; de tient li versaies ou il est le nons et en l’s a la moitor.
de la piere	Of stone removal
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the section the methods of stone removal and extraction along with medicines; we also described the difference between stones placed by rain, all signs, and where one must operate on sizeable stones; as well as within the bladder and penis; I will now clearly and briefly explain to you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones placed within the bladwarthey occur more often in children and it is a sign of urine flowing from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there are sand-like substances, and graininess in their penises, and they frequently pass them, then become lodged; and many suffer these stone movements; healing for children is relatively easy until they have reached four years of age, but it becomes very severe with adults and moderate for those between youth and old age; the treatment of larger stones is easier than that of smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	When we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema, in order to cleanse all feces from the intestines. For at times there may be obstruction caused by stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and stand them upright until the stone descends to the front of the bladebox, and it does not come up again. Then let him sit between your hands properly arranged, with his hands below his thighs so that the bladder is fully inclined downward; then grasp and touch its sides.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten to cut it out immediately. And if it does not come out with all your effort, moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child or an adolescent, use your middle finger; and insert it into its foundation, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, move to the neck of the bladebox; then press below your finger, and push the stone out through whichever hole you cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend the nails of his right hand upward, and to remove the skin from under the nails on his left hand in the part where one makes an incision; then he applies the spatula copiously, which forms it.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And they make between the nails and the base, not inside but to the left of the navel; and it is right above the stone, and your legs are together or apart from the floor, and make them so that the opening be wide at the bottom due to defecation, and narrow internally according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Sometimes press the legs if they are at the base or floor, so that it springs without effort; and know that there is a piece of stone with angles, and margins: those will be easier to remove; and some pieces which are smooth like glass, round, from which the removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	When the bone has angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not yield, it is necessary to extract with tongs similar to a file at the top, in order to widen the hole so it doesn't escape; or you place under the instrument, a subtle curved device on the head; and if you cannot manage this way, make a small opening, and if the bone has been corrupted, extract with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one bone, first remove the largest from the bladder neck, then cut above it, then extract the base, and other small ones afterwards if any. And if they are very large, you must make a larger wound, for two things happen to the patient: death or urine flowing back because the urethra cannot seal; however, do your best in milking, or debridement with tonglete, until it is drained into pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon'annointing oil, and bandage it, and place a linen cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water over it to cool down the abscess; then wrap the patient up on his back, and do not remove the dressing until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you reset it, it is raised well with oil and water, then treated with the final diafinitus ointment and basilisk ointment until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses and ulcers occur in the wound and blood congeals within the bladder, preventing urine flow: thus insert your finger into the wound to drain the blood, as if left there it will cause the bladebladder and prostate to become inflamed.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then clean the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and aid in all ways that you can, until healed; and it is necessary that for every application of ointment, you bind his two thighs together and apply the remedies to the area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	If the stone is small and it is located near the vein and inserted there, and urine cannot pass; then treat as I have described here, by making multiple incisions at this location for relief. I have experienced this method before.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron rod according to this shape and make it with three sharpened edges in one section:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a wire around the vein below the stone so that it cannot reach back to the bladebag; then insert the rod gently into the vein until you feel resistance. Twist the rod with your hand lightly and slowly towards another part of the stone, as if piercing through it from there; urine will come out shortly after, then press your hand on what remains lodged in the vein within the stone. It is instantly broken apart, bursts out with the urine, and provides relief to the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you cannot do this due to any hindrance, then take a thread below the wound and another above, then make the rod between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, and untie the ligature, and cleanse the coagulated blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	From women's stones (likely referring to uterine fibroids or other related conditions).
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes stones are found in women'wart hilt, and if it happens even once, the treatment is difficult for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second reason is that they cannot find a skilled woman who can undress before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that sometimes it may not be possible to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's body is harder than that of a man, so deeper incision must be made, which causes great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to do so, you must bring a midwife who knows well and trustworthy, and search for one carefully. If you cannot find such a skilled midwife or woman knowledgeable in the art of women's health, then choose wisely from the available ones; and instruct them to perform as commanded in the stone removal.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And carefully observe if the woman is a virgin: then she must place her hand or bottom and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it from under her and command that she puts her hand or joins with the patient, pressing firmly her left hand onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If it is torn, one must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then push on the bone at the hip near the joint where it has been dislocated, feeling for the protruding bone in that area, and do not move its knee over or under the bone, and let the flesh be torn slightly.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then insert the rod into the thigh; if you feel the bone and can expose it far enough for the bone to be removed forcefully, know that there are many types of bones: they may be small or large, sharp or blunt, long or round, with ridges. Understand these kinds in order to know their outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the bone does not break easily, put vinegar on it and hold for an hour until it becomes pliable; then return to your work, so that the bone is firm enough, and have the splints I told you about in extracting the bones from the horses to help you with your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the blood does not stop flowing, and it is from an artery that has been severed, then apply powder to the area and use ligatures and bandages, do not attempt again in this manner, leave the wound untreated unless by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb has regained its strength, return to your practice until the wound is healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernias of fleshly matter
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Immediately following a urination is not anything else but an assembly of moisture or white faeces, which is below the head of the kidneys that contains the urethra; and it is called "faeces", and never properly in the tissue of the urethra, as one might think it to be another organ; and it is the leather of the kidney between the white faeces we have mentioned; and this does not occur often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this urine is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and it spreads throughout those tissues.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it never comes from impact on the kidneys, and this urine has many colors: sometimes yellowish in hue, or without redness, black, clear, and this happens more frequently.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs of this assembly being whitened as we have said, so it is short abscesses, i.e., long like an egg's shape, and do not open the veins, for they are entirely moistened.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it is moist in the proper cloth, then there are short abscesses with part of the membrane, and thus one thinks it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the whitened membrane, then it feels quite well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, probe all around the inserted thing fully, wherein the form was previously as described.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the introduction, judge accordingly.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed as much as possible and have their body replenished; then they lie on their back, on something slightly raised, and place many layers of cloth underneath.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then they lie on their left side, and command the assistant to sit on their right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the lower edge of the collarbones;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	the s but s:
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the shaft completely filled with water to one wide hole and extract all the water, then put in linen bandages, and extend the shaft upwards; do not touch the head of the bones, but only the shaft itself; wrap it carefully or piece by piece like its delicate ribs, and if you don't bind it firmly enough, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the joint slips during your work, when you have completed the treatment of the shaft, then join the two halves of the bone head with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint to be affected by another disease, it is necessary that you bind all the vessels that are hanging loosely, suspecting bleeding; then cut out the bone head entirely and treat as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the bone is fractured into two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; treat the other part as you did the first one equally, then stop the bleeding and apply linen soaked in rose oil to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and then apply another layer of soaked linen in wine and oil, place two layers on top, and cover with doubled cloths, securing them all according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of cloth, cut the ragged linen according to this pattern and stitch them together around the girdle of trousers, one side reaching from the foundation to the back, and the other over the hollow of the wrist; the second piece is fitted on both forearms, securing it all in a belt at the waist.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	Et never is this branch of fire-cautery in the place of a barbed steel tool, and you shall take .i. fine cauterizing cultellus, and cut the leather from the sheaths, and soften it as we have said, so that the white worm contained within the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the fire-cautery thusly, and pierce that white worm at its joints, and scrape with this subtle hot cauterizing tool;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And you scrape in all manners that you can, until you have scraped everything; and keep the flame from touching the egg; and know that this work is more healing; and be mindful of bleeding wells, and make sure that the wound drains properly.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	If no other thing occurs to you contrary or an abscess or blood flow or other matter, treat that which is contrary to you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this procedure due to its severity, perform a puncturing as I instruct you, and when you are well certain through the signs we have discussed that reflux must be stopped.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If the patient sits on a raised seat with their legs elevated; then pierce the abscess below all the surrounding fat tissue, and place the puncture deep into the body's core; and make the holes wide enough that all of the fluid may flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then apply cotton at the site, bind it, and allow for drainage of any remaining fluid; then heal until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the gauze bandage does not allow fluid to exit through the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a tube or instrument used in draining abscesses as previously described; and slightly enlarge the wound, ensuring that fluid returns, coming together again after 15 days or so, and when assembled as before, this will allow the patient to recover.
de l’aposteme des coions	For treating an abscess in the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	In this part of this branch there are fearful conditions in various cases, which seem to me that it should be left alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the procedure and similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the joints; and this is quite often seen.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	n’n:
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it may be a frightening and painful abscess with a bloody color, and never comes from us of arteries or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it originates from ours [from the patient], then it is known by the appearance of an inflamed abscess when you press with your hands.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	how they: (and sosten to:
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	He who is afflicted with vein swelling can be recognized by his tendency to react when touched on the joints.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and may even perform surgery upon this kind of limb, and other fractures as well.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the head of the collarbone, then elevate it upwards, and expose the white fascia, and release the suspensory ligament from all sides of the humerus.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If it is near the liver or within the vessels, one must completely remove them, and roundly cut out the sack.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if a stone's birth is behind it or there, one must completely remove the stone and extract its contents as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are completed, dress the wound with lin cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess surrounded by swelling resembling a lump, with the softening of boils.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and it quickly changes in appearance when approached by the ill-disposed.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and soi lesme:
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And thus we shall tell you the procedure for it, as done by the ancients.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you seat the patient on an elevated chair, then put a support under his knees.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are near the penis and the testicles, and make them straight outwardly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut with a sharp spatula across the area where the vessels are, until they are fully exposed,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	ivo s and (1. Et t; pas sot;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle where there is one with a double thread, and tie it at the first spot where the vein appears, then securely to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then wrap the bandages tightly straight, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted sores.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as you would with others or make a bandage, ensuring that none of the threads rot away and one of the sides does not.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	by (the ou Re leman.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the joints lose their nourishment from the incision of vessels, they dry up and cannot be healed.
de la routure dou syfac	For this swelling due to a snakebite
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The remedies for this viper bite are by cutting the area of the fang wound or extending pressure to the abdomen in the groin region, causing the intestines to protrude from that swelling toward one side.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	the a and sonle ;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	When the signs indicate that it is due to an extended sigh, then they occur gradually over a long time and do not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the boils are equal up towards the forehead because the sigh accelerates the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to a cut sigh, which causes sudden pain at first, and various boils appear close to the skin, from below the hair, as an issue of the intestine and in all parts affected by the sigh.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	In; If youre bon's ct; f.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And for these iron treatments of fear, one must dispel them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	The manner of the work is that you command the ill person to cleanse his intestines into his hand within the wound if it can enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then gently press above its neck between your hands, and lift the hindquarters.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Next, stretch the body upwards, and cut all of the skin around the joints lengthwise.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put the guts of the abdomen into hooks as needed to open the wound, and make them such that you can pull out the intestines.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	ym le c not... The  (or; and they. the CJ. If you may they a egress: Jum.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then insert your index finger into the hole which supports it, in that between the white sinew and below the skin of the elbow, and between the second sinew.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and remove that which is behind the elbow, and between the second sinew; then move your hand to the head of the joints inside the right hand, extend the white sinew upwards towards your left hand, and lift the elbow with all the sinews towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant that they extend the elbow upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if it has wrapped any part of the intestines around or hardened white sackworms, and if you find anything therein, then blow into the belly from below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle or one with a thick thread made of several strands, and blow into the rear part where it is after the calf's hide; behind the waist, then cut out the hairs that show through the threads until there are four strings remaining.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and bind the hide which we have said is located below the calf's hide with a strong tie using two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the children and form them into two parts so that none of the winds that nourish them can enter in without pus, with no abscesses occurring.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place the ligatures according to the first ligature for two fingers long of it, and after these two ligatures leave out the sack which is outside below the corner of the eye; a great distance of one finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And afterwards according to the roundness that the eye bears; then cut along the part which is outside below the eyebrow, as we have said before, without hurting it or damaging the bow.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then prepare softened cloth with oil, and apply it to wounds, and also prepare the bandage as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauldrated the white scab that we have mentioned, after incision, out of fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens and leaves the bandage until it is healed; and if it takes time to come off, soak in warm water and place as we have said, until it is healed.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	s the fact ondudusme; The Jum by howso; provide.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia due to fleshly protrusion
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone daring to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said it is made as if like the reamer that joins the nails together just above the bone, pressing them lightly and then removing pressure.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	be a in the following: che on les to the and r, then nes.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Never does rotundity come to the ankles as we have said, and they open up; and none of the intestines are attached with ligaments, and if any do detach, it is slight, and heals within hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And at the same time, if it remains too long in this spot, a hernia or abscess forms until the intestines protrude.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens from the spreading of the abscess which is in the ankles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflated both skin and opening.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment is by fire as we have previously mentioned; and on occasion it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then wrap the inflamed wound with a bandage as wide as three fingers' worth of cloth.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then extract the sack that lies beneath the skin, and take a piece of thread and tie it around the visible part of the sack.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the skull from the wound, and cover nothing of the sinew or extend the uvula or any other thing, as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal perforations.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then he is cured through wound care. And when you bandage the wounds, if they become infected and you treat the injury until it is cleaned.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is constricted, and does not have an appearance in the dressing, and the cautery has healed at this place, and closer to recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From softening of the leather of joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of joints is softened in certain individuals because their internal structures are mollified, and fluid can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat them, that they lie on their back while the area affected by softening is covered with skin, then join the two edges together using a stitch, and if you look first remove the excess leather in three or four firm stitches; then sew between the stitches as with other wounds until it heals, and let them sneeze.
dou chastrement	In the art of surgery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Chastrains are outlined in our law and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; however, there are two reasons they must be addressed: the first is so that masters can respond when asked about chastraining and its cure, and the. The other is because we often need chastraining of various animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, deer, and other creatures. Thus, I say chastraining is done in two ways: by attraction or incision. In the method where we do it by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its joints are softened and pliable; then grip with your hand so that they are returned to their place and you no longer feel them. For chastraining by cutting: you must hold the animal, press down on the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie a sling, and wrap each hoof with bandages once properly scalded; and leave no piece of fecal matter or fine dung under its hoovebeams. This way of chastraining is similar to attraction because in attraction sometimes nothing remains on the joints when heated, which causes lustfulness in the animal; then treat the wound until it's healthy again.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are those with both male and female characteristics.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	or.
de la tentigene	Of the inflammation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Inflammation is a swelling near the natural part, so unsightly to look upon; women have it as large as one's hand, and this is its healing. One must reduce the excess inflammamo(u)r on their hands or ankles gently, not too far inwards, lest bleeding occurs, then proceed with other treatments until it becomes healthy again; and another swelling that arises from the mouth of a vein, its base, and occasionally bursts forth, resembling a hollow. This was called by ancients "maladie kowee". If it must be treated as we have said for inflammation, treat until it is healthy again.
de erratique	Erratic refers to something that lacks a fixed direction or pattern; in medicine, this could refer to symptoms or conditions that manifest unpredictably or without clear causality. The specific translation of the term may vary depending on its usage within the context of a medical text from the Middle Ages. However, since "de erratique" is not a standard phrase or word in Old French medical terminology, it might be necessary to clarify that this appears to be an isolated term without further information available for accurate translation. If "erratique" is intended to mean erratic behavior or symptoms within the text, the translation could be:
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Irregular if the nature of women is not fully pierced or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or due to disease that comes about, or it's through an instrument inserted either gently or deeply, and is formed entirely in the thighs, or buttocks, or elsewhere, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and sometimes even childbirth; and knowledge of this depends on examining by sight. If bleeding occurs nearby, apply pressure with both hands or a rag. If it is a subtle syphilitic sore, and appears close to two months or more, act quickly, and treat as follows: place the two index fingers together, and have the woman lie down on her back with legs apart; then extend the two fingers fully until the syphilitesteemers are gone, and apply over the swelling; then use wool and tallow mixed in oil, and apply it to the area each day so that healing can occur. And if the sore is hard and spotted, you must cut a leaf-shaped piece of myrtle bark for treatment. If bleeding occurs from an injury, suspend a cloth on a rod; and use medicines such as bloodstone, dragon's blood resin, incense mixed with frankincense in abundance; then prepare a large bandage so that the wound cannot close, and leave it long-lasting, and also apply a linen tent; then treat with other remed cures until healed. And when bleeding occurs in the thighs, cover according to this method unless there are deep abscesses near the injury. Because for an encrusted boil on the thigh, it should not be touched or probed by a stick.
des emorroides	For hemorrhoids:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	e inissistant, andthe ma.
des apostemes de la marris	From abscesses of the muscles
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	There are many ways in which boils come from the muscles, such as chancres and piercing boils, herpes, itching conditions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and burning boils, along with other diseamoigns that I have mentioned earlier. Therefore, I shall now explain the treatment of a hot boil in the muscles, which is not one of those boils that simply form a blister; observe carefully if you know how to work with iron. If the boil appears red and warm initially, accompanied by fever, do not hasten to puncture it immediately but let the pain subside first. Then make the patient lie on their back, place two small pillows for them to rest against, and elevate their legs. Spread out their thighs, and position their arms below their hips while securing with a good bandage; then turn the instrument that is used to treat the mouth of the muscle toward you later on; ensure when using this instrument that it enters no further than necessary without causing additional discomfort. If swelling persists, cover the depth reached by the instrument with linens so the tool does not cause more pain; and once the boil has burst open and can be handled, apply a clean cloth to absorb any pus gently. Afterward, treat the area as described in the division I have provided earlier.
de l’enfantement	from the medieval medical textbook on wound care: When treating an aposteme les boil, and keep it is healed; after which treatment was used to be treated. If a fistulae treat, if necessary when. And with pus abscesses are infected and other conditions of as perforation. Infected, the wound cleaning the lanced. Then bandage apply poultaceaux.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	First it is necessary to understand the natural shape of birth and its signs when you see a woman straining to push outwards, desiring to smell blood: then quickly the child must be born; thus you know that this birth follows the natural pattern, with the head issue from above and the second part following; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so the child comes out soon, for as they descend on their head, the second part follows too, and their skull bones are well-formed by good molding; and those who come otherwise do not come naturally. For sometimes they come on their limbs, or it is strong in body or neck, and in hands, or where they come out of her belly or sides, and may turn accidentally around the neck, or other malicious forms; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle about these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out naturally with its head first and the woman labours heavily, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; and let her nature's oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then give the midwife between her thumbs the small spatula in this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	the femme et le tuisent la s; ande mots de la parle fuit then bont, et: ase, ou tu meus les mainte la.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the dislocation of a child under its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes on its feet, one must lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slightly and slightly until they are levelled.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	and siles they de the c (the g;l;
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it falls just to the hips, if ordered to press, and there is an eruption of condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it falls far, if God wills so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not far as we have said, if you turn little by little until it returns to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Once done with ease.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come back as we have said, take mucilage of alum, and linseed oil, and molten wax, and all mixed in one mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply to the affected area within the body, along with this salve mixture.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her sit in warm water until below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	When it is softened by pressure from outside, make a paste of myrrh, apply it there and leave for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then seat the child on a chair, then make them sneeze and strain their mouth and nose; gently press their abdomen, as now the baby has started to move.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of a child dislocated on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, place your hands gently and gradually.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be soothing on his neck, hang his feet downwards, and let him lie on a bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	the f de, but also ndes li s text. And so that it is not try to m s ie:
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	When children do not walk, grasp their legs firmly, then move the legs upward, and finally raise the belly.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And gradually rock the child back and forth; instruct the woman to continue until the child urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the passage of the child, take out a handful with one hand while
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	s ;l’d c�.  they et les, and so. Do:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If you cannot reset it, lift the woman up and away.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed and stand both legs apart.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then attend to the muscle swelling as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And wrap the child according to its natural shape, and let it sneeze, and command that it suckle until the baby has fallen asleep.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the dislocation of the child's head near its neck, and let his hands spread out, and turn his face toward his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is required that the bailiff dye his hand, then twist it slightly, and wrap it gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is evened out, place upon the natural mud-like substance of wax and oil as we have said, then command that it move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, let the patient sit on a seat, and command that they cough; then let them sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for everything in the second instance
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	t's c - fir et te peceu:t illle Tarn; And so.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if a child lies on its face with its head hanging down, the cap slips off, and it is not held in place, causing the child to die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then lay the child down properly as needed and instruct the woman not to move at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	Afterwards, if necessary, gently apply force.
de l’issue des gemelz	;t e-cons that he;l's o :le t in: igne they for the boflesh by they don's ; you to the translation is a s.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Sores often arise many times, and sometimes they appear three or four at once; it is not an extraordinary thing, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are extraordinary, and do not live long, if rarely named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are dispersed by the snake who drives them away, which is connected to the bladder.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	un le butt; te: b’s C's that heal*t not they don’. I with thes pLat s: M. A
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it comes apart quickly, follow the treatment as we have said, and be swift yet gentle in what you do.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And do so as it will bring about good health.
de plusors enfans	and many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	At no time are they formed in the mares.i. or .ij. or .iij. or .iiij. or .v. or .vj. or .vij., or more up to .xv., and all shaped like a child by proper measurement with the glorious tool.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it is fitting that the bailiff gather all of this, as sometimes similar things happen to him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if he does so according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of a child who has passed away
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When treating a woman with the deceased or pregnant child, as I have mentioned in the section on it, and there is no expulsion, and you are compelled to work by hand.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary that you assure yourself if the woman is of sound mind and has not had an accident or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary that the woman be lying on her back with her head inclined and legs elevated;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	; [the.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the maris with oil from moistened almonds and musk root and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and musk.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then gently bind it in place, then securely wrap the tendons with bandages as needed.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And be careful if the child's fontanels are open so that they do not descend above their forehead;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If the tonsils are found within his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or behind the palate or under the beard or near the throat or close to the ribs.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the lymph nodes are on his feet, if they become swollen and protrude between the middle ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to wash the tonsils with his right hand, placing the spoon between the fingers of his left hand, gently pressing all over the hand, until he finds one of those places we have mentioned.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	the s; they by the t. If you dont. Oudre vie; (and there * Ct oule a ben le* and ihere;<brfe, as ce;
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then apply to another joint or wherever you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend equally from one side to the other in order for them to move out and become well-aligned, so that the joints are shaped properly as they should be.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part remains, then treat it by applying some of its oil to the affected areas and apply it there, and work on the other side.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	;d end the de la tat:
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, it cannot be brought back due to tightness.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if it is necessary to wrap with a bandage so that it extends fully.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then wrap with a bandage at the joint of the foot or knee, and thus it is fitting that you do so on the other hand, and for two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it protrudes at the back, or has one side of the skull fused together.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it is necessary to place a spinous bandage between your two fingers and make an incision and remove the skull piece.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	When you apply with the instrument called "almidatch", the shape comes along with the extensions or paste that follows this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in like manner, it forms the child with significant natural growth.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pulls out the bones using pincers,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	in the same. Inulgrouw c (in-to ceussi's  (cule dalire: The text phey ebonner se t. And ift. What I. JB:
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	If it cannot be released, break the skin by making cuts where you see fit.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, then one must pierce until the pus flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is over its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the calf bone is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is uncomfortable in the belly or udder, one should strain with an aid of a strip wrapped around by hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	, and so that le passt puer se tu beau s to it is de lesseus to the la place, and then re, si sa peindre of its est ce.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	When another limb is aching and the head remains dislocated,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If the patient's hand is swoln at the beginning of a vein, and treat it up to the mouth of the vein;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he inserts an oncin or two, and makes them straight;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	When the mouth of the muscle is retracted by an abscess that has arisen there, one must not exert effort.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	But it is necessary to apply moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply balms for inflammation, cut in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if a child is on his back, place him as we have instructed for a live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if you cannot do so, divide the treatment into parts, leaving nothing of the secondary procedure.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And once this is done, follow what we have said about abscesses when they arise.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	If there is bleeding from movement, it must be stopped by applying a tight bandage, and then other treatments are administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with twins inside her womb; one was dead while the other was alive and unharmed.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time an abscess appeared in her thigh, and it swelled so much that it covered the area, causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	byt.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place on strong attraction and extract one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I greatly doubted because it has a belly without bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	the ocul;
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	Upon examining the wound and breaking the bone, wait until the woman is at a better point.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman suffered for a long time thus, and was slightly bowed at the joint.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter because when the master encounters something strange, he knows how to apply help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	in returning the bone to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of the pressure, to which one attaches the books; and at two turns with two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns must be more refined with regard to restriction, and made of board or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	To do sois se pours. L'autrefor ce que s chapeur, and of the casson ou ne sautez et le feu est dou peux to be made of ait: et doupeir, li cori-il. 9. 2860
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And among the two limbs are two dislocations of this same kind, which must be firmly set in each one, about half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two dislocations are bent at the joint of the arm when you turn the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	And made, orelle duit ne est ceste corde de ointie.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And it has two heads and two joints, as you see, one hand's length long, and two hands wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see opening the marrow with all instruments, make the woman sit on one bed, spread her legs and arms apart.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then put both dislocations together into the arm, and hold the head of the instrument below between its thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the entire instrument, as if you have done with pliers evenly, according to the quantity that opens the mouth of the arm, until it does what it wants to do.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all made of bronze, and it has multiple forms; and the more skilled they are in making them, the faster the work, and higher at home for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	byud? (th; so much; And you or not, they have.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second toe is caught during childbirth, it must be commanded that the patient grip his calf, and then one should induce sneezing with certain conditions, and strain the hands to the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if this happens due to a spasm, it is well understood.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and cut the lid or cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as sage, rue, anise, chamomile, mint, and centaurium.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or any of them, are boiled in water over the fire; then place an iron net or strainer in one pot and the other end into the mouth of the mortar.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let it steep until the vapor rises in the mortar; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If his second condition is a stabbing pain.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	If it remains after this treatment and is not healed, command the maid to moisten her left hand in oil of embalming or high-quality musk, and then place it back on its own.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And she shall seek the splint; and when it is found, gently bend and extend it slightly straight so that the sinew does not snap during removal.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But she must move it lightly to the right and left, then flex; she will come back and be relieved.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the scrotum is stretched out, we have said the remedy is to induce sneezing and inhaling herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it does not result from all of this as we have said, then be sure you do not touch the teat.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the scrotum be tied to the thighs of women and then enema with fourfold medicated ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	t the her: Zan de la Maglia ce ne f, and c's.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then you should conduct incense-laden smoke in this manner: none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with rosemary and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman for retaining childbirth fluids and afterpains is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles an animal, with the head delicately made in shape, and wide shoulders above the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	s.
de percier lou fondement	Of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	A child is born who does not have the foundations pierced, but rather it has been finely split with a needle.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it is fitting for the midwife to pierce that which has been split at its appointed time and not with an acute needle, and she must guard against touching the stitches.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	that, as: ce quem lief not ne soi:
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it pops out again, then place a woolen cloth over the joint and let it rest for several days, until the child is ready to walk in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And this swelling from suturing a wound or an abscess does not occur; if it needs to be re-sutured: use the treatment with the woolen cloth as we have mentioned before.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that arise from below the foundation are inflamed and swell up those coming near the foundation or within the space of the two parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one fistula or several; and if that inflammation is old, work it out, and provide warmth with clean or subtle bowels.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and never are these fistulas dry; and recognized by what comes out or waste through the patient's stool when they have diarrhee, and sometimes in vomiting with foam.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	bessibly; t or in-Faluire ; by his le oucfe; aont so thatn the coleze and other; < kori's at est en the maine m. êtes crates if they.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so one finds a persistent fistula at the base, and it is not healing.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	Et c'est qu'il faut percer l'index ou le pouce, et insérer une aiguille fine d'acier ou d'argent dans la fistule quand elle n'est pas tordue.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	Et s'il y a torsion, alors insèrez un petit tampon fin, ou c'est-à-dire du poil de cheval, jusqu'à ce que vous sentiez la compression à votre doigt.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	Et si vous n’en ressentez aucun, et qu'il n'y ait pas de perte d'effluence ni de ventilation ni d'excrément comme nous l'avons déjà mentionné :
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Sleeves so that they do not puncture; if you hasten to cauterize them.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or urethra, allowing urine to pass through it and cannot be controlled by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it extends to the hip joint, then pus flows into that area.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	the oustide peir ne eue, and so they.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these perianal abscesses there is no certain remedy except painful treatment, and the folly of foolish men who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those who are not fearful nor old, with hope of healing by iron, as I have tested.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs angled towards their belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then wrap a tent of flax or linen if there is any twisting, until you know where the tent lies.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	s eble to not; don’ciza. And then: that hewed.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	When you then sense that the area has been felt; and if it is revealed or you feel between your fingers a sac or a scar, then announce that they are present.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If you do not turn it, for it cannot be healed otherwise.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Everywhere one can properly heal some, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	by Caulautre.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And the stick is heated in the fistula until it nears the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that the drawn charcoals have cooled down, which are similar to a feather of a bird.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Then the treatment for swollen veins involves applying butter until the drawn charcoals are used up, then apply an ointment that soothes and binds.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, it is well done. There can be no other way to be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	If it is between and does not pierce to the end that lies at its foundation, and between your two fingers and the tent an extensive covering of cartilage or flesh, then you will see the fistula where the skin puckers beneath the covering.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you remove the beginning of the fistula and push it back before the tent, then apply the fire cautery until it reaches the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And he will be freed from the tent and shall scar over; then remove any protruding fragments that resemble a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If the vein is won, cut between you and the flesh, then cauterize with fire or medicinal herbs.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire caustery gathers two things: that is to say, the burning of these adjacent parts and the coagulation of blood and drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then treat twisted tendons with poultices or chopped bread until the bowels leak, and tie the threads to the bow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat wounds from burns by applying poultices with a hard paste, and use dry medicinal substances.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it heals well and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	the ch: :e cra�[S:
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tendon is taut between two points where it can be cut or severed, there should only be faith and hope through one of these three methods by administration:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	When you cauterize as we have said, or excise until the root, or if it appears to still be alive, treat it with a course of action as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not proceed too far upward, so you do not excise the element that holds the foundation, and let excretions come out as they willingly desire.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then heal it, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by son'm; Flower: ca; and ecrill’s.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then make a suitable bandage which is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound, and keep the abscess in place on the part behind the base; it would be an easier matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And never are there abscesses in this manner; and when you insert the tent into the abscess, it is close to the base near the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a pierced tent according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread of two lengths, and pushes the tentacle throughout the abscess until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced near the bottom of the dental foundation, then extract that thread from its eyelet, as you insert your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and treat the head of the thread, and bring together both heads as one, and constrain them to each other, leaving it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	. If he said:
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess is not healed through drainage, it should be cut in all possible ways if it does not penetrate too deeply.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make a large incision at first, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the pointed spatula used to make a fistula is sharp and one-sided, with a cutting edge.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand not, because it does not cut as you should not cut; as you see here:
des emorroydes	by.
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	In many ways: some are within the foundation, like sap of pitch, and there are small ones and large ones, and at their core blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and some have one or more cores, and they protrude from the foundation and toward its top; but those that are loose have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and there is also a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the body's color;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	by the benx. You.; There are line (1 and:
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you act quickly, and with pliers, where you hold it at your fingernail, then cut the root.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the fingers cannot hold them due to their slipperiness, that you take them with a rag, or cotton, or a piece of camlet.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And pull out the hairs from both sides, then cut them, and powder over hot ashes that are present at the site of cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	When you cauterize as described in this chapter of fire cautery, then treat with other remedies until it is healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter cleansing to wash out what is at the base, so it can come forth openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the feces are hard, and the thread (enema) is too much in the foundation, then the treatment should be gentle;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	the fude by and so long.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary to dress the wound in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and make it wide enough; then tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the neednail, and do likewise with all others, leaving some for excess blood to be absorbed.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a small cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation, and put it over the area, and instruct the patient to rest there.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it lie until they settle, and when they are set in place, treat with ointment and other remederseven until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Firstly the foundation or groundwork
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it frequently happens that there is blockage in the intestines and due to natural constraint, especially when illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	the in an. The patient s n's (1, but that:
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat it until it is settled as needed.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be stabilized, resume the smoothing stronger than before until it is sufficiently healed, and be scraped.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it becomes healthy.
dou fremit	The heat of fire cauterization causes slight tremors.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A flea is a small creature found on the body and spreads widely.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and it never brings warmth but rather feels like cold trembling, appearing throughout the body, especially in the hands more than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	isn: anguile ough for this the he prist.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to the entire neck until you grasp it completely around the tremor, and place it firmly in front, and straighten the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a chain of iron or steel in this manner, and be subtle below and traverse above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not perceive with the eyes, but hold it in both hands and press it firmly; And if you see it, cauterize the tremor as if it were before or a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	the uue et:
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At no time is an enema made of silver or brass, or melted lead or molten metal; and at no time are these small and large suppositories prepared according to the substances they contain.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	However, those which are made in the treatment of children who are weak and sorrowful should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enema is as follows, depending on whether the belly is tied up in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	c.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And let the belly or eye receive the remedies from a bladder of beast or parchment, and be pierced all around by small punctures.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And between each puncture, there should be space, then insert a strong thread through these small holes, and secure the belly as if it were an untied bag.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the remedy is placed inside, tie it with a strong thread at the instrument's end, then enema; and this forms a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	t.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the minister grasps its two hands together until they are squeezed dry, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to the surface.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine needs to be expelled, as much as it can through ringworm; and if he sleeps all night, then greater help is achieved.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer the enema for a bowel disorder, and the medicine needs to be expelled quickly, repeat until he is healthy again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	When the hemorrhoid is at its base or an abscess, provide a clyster as subtle as for one child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	**(15th, par la gulphes que osteon et su tous limbs **se tu es**
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In the division of wound care, we have said previously; now let us discuss treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what causes or ways the wounds are made, and for what reasons they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things made by causing wounds are through the thrust of a spear, and cutting with a sword and ax, or with a lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Things made according to the natural openings of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or head, or thighs, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, as memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from piercing of an arrow or similar objects, and the skin is always torn and the wounds are large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and if you slightly doubt an abscess is hot: if the wound immediately becomes warm on the head mainly when there's blood from the wound, it should be washed with something contrary to the affected part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and remove the patient's lethargy by providing wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	If it does not wish to fasten, its flesh shall be amputated, and it should not drink wine nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply to the wound if there is an abscess, with a cloth soaked in oil or tinted wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no abscess, apply to the fresh wound that has not bled fully and is not moved by air or dust, sprinkle it with powder as I will say later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	t; Ichad :
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, with edges that cannot be joined by stitches, join them by suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, in sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is open to the bone, and flat, and holds only slightly, then cover it; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hardened skin in place of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instructs the sickly person to eat large meats, such as tested and cooked wheat, also like eggs, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or suspect putrefaction, and it does not affect the bone, completely remove the rot, then pour wine, and treat.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which without treatment cannot be stopped by medicines, so bind it with a thread if you find that it is torn.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If this does not help at all, then resort to cauterization.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: apply this powder that dries just as salt causes things to move.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of making the powder is as follows: take one part incense, two parts blood of dragon, three parts quicksilver, and grind finely.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	as the dissert and sof; cuze; they  that not detre is the purpose; in English with them: an.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then securely bind it, allowing movement if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed completely.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never perform this treatment solefly; when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the physician has not healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the physician has healed the wound, especially in this case, do not use any of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	le t c. Et n the bon:
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat other injuries until healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract with delicate forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about skull fractures afterward.
de la plaie dou col	From a wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes from the neck and it is straightforward, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery in the neck are damaged.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the veins, there's no other remedy but to allow healing, and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the vessels and causes them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	en sondat a les de the s ;fait is not so that.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But let the medicinal herb be soaked as if washed in gentle water and sweetened with rose oil, and boiled similarly in gentle water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other minerals prepared in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages; then treat until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	(or, i: they are the same as that nt ula.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arrow is embedded, with bleeding inflowing, then you must expose it, extract it, and cauterization may be necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the spine of the throat is embedded, or the cartilage, and the pathway is blocked, so that tissue becomes affected.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if it cuts into the bone of the throat's cartilage, but does not harm the throat itself, then restore it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	line: that est the fe lasd sympts; e t.e: ce: f. In addition. The bole les*.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has caused pressure on the bone, then choose it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are bone fragments, pull out all that you can, and leave those that cannot be removed; let the wound remain until it scabs.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let it be removed and aligned properly;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the dust as I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones and a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	ete toun:
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the injury is deep, observe if there are signs of vasculosity as the patient pales: know then that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	If it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder in the first hour or bind with bandages that would stop the bleeding from flowing freely.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, affecting the eyes of the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But apply an attractive balm, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	li; and the, which que c (c.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	Let the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no more spasm or muscle tremors in the body.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bone properly positioned, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat with tent and other remedies until it is sound;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal or close, when you know there is a fistula, then treat as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	the painte:
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone along with portions of cartilage, then treat the wound and remove any foreign bodies.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not lodged, allow the wound to heal naturally, ensuring proper alignment of any extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other injuries on other limbs, make judgements as we have previously stated.
dou derrompement dou ventre	During a rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocations of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from a great wound never occur an intrusion of the intestines or their nerves, which leads to an infection.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	as much.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	This is why you must frequently reset them back in place, if they are not reset one after the other.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because the intestines swell soon when they feel cold, thus they protrude more frequently.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And thus the middle wound heals, so you move the intestines back to their place like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the treatment of the abdomen is according to four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common suturing methods occur in the stitching of the abdomen,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the suture of other bodily wounds and two other specific sutures are common for other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	bye:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	When a wound is small and there is no issue with any internal organ.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And if it needs to be reset, this can be done by one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Also: ici et heum, and so that is done:
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with only warm water slightly.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or cook in slightly boiling water with salt, ginger, and pepper.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And when the intestine arises, until it is sufficiently swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never should one do this that restricts them, but rather lift up to allow expansion.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation receding, if the intestines are cooked with cold or warm and bitter water.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For by this reason the entrance is aligned with a small object;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, make a slight incision at the instrument by which you cut corns.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to remove whatever is obstructing it.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	they don’t de:
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the straining to split:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If he cuts into the bone but does not reach it, and there comes its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is expanded, and the internal tissue burst forth,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	.
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you can manage it, for this is a movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and located in the part above the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if it must be that you make the sick person lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	And he raises his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	And if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If he raises his head and feet higher than the parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	When the hernia of the belly is in one of the two parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	ensure that the wounded part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus gently so that they're as gentle the tire de air essent.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, apply what has been prescribed,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then have at hand a minister of pity who grinds the remedy to your palm,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	s
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And it is so you may take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave space at the head of the wound, about two spaces apart, and insert a needle where there is a strong thread or wire.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two edges with the two ends of the sliver.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	ly that tile; That’t le c��ly les bon et p li:Jumbers; The line f; heus, and sofa et se la g at; don'the te ou the est. Touni; OU foret angu; do not toji
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	And join together both heads of the shoulder, with the two ends connected;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then strain a double thread through both needle eyes,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then immediately join the two edges of the wound together.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and let it have some space, then insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	the ou 1 wounds, de lons est:
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	Et continuer à le faire comme nécessaire avec les aiguilles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	As long as the entire wound is properly closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	And use the needles appropriately, neither too subtle nor too thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	For fine needles cover all the hair, and those too thick cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size:
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	And do not insert the needles too far from the hair and into the skin.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that do not so they should I don’t
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	Then protect the heads of nails so they do not pinch the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And place bandages or cloths on the heads of nails to hold them steady.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	by Camilt; l’; don’s e ce: cmaichti; ou ses en t and; If you see (prison cesse, for vit anno; est le même.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	This manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	For it requires one or two needles therein.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitching method is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	the n’s, and:
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have identified all four of these things together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reset the arrow in the part where you began, in the manner that one wears dresses;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place space between each stitch as wide as a small finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	These stitches hold for him.
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	And I sewed a wound that had been to his belly.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was pained by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	1 and it does not as a bonis: est they do not the translation of is to be sure way. And so long and le pait with the file themself, and thatnazez and heal or. Then comment il sans tissued ine ecut if yout this text ointainte de c, et que bon la peux:
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	And thus, of the intestines are two large fins.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And there was a wound amidst the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back his intestines as it had been for twenty-four hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	by.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician judged that he would die, yet it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment either, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and every day I placed two pieces of cloth above the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	That sis, so far la ; thet; and they ne lie me; que l's’s  (don’t it is not; do t1. If you can'se an; if he-fors. So that a:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and push it through to the part behind until you reach its interior.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has perceived the head straight in line, if at the base of the skull or where you have inserted the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	est a li cuers tu de ce leu to do the lignor, s'est la, you have as ours les parties of the craft and it all par tout ce en sonli the has tous parts reach inside, so que part dedens. ici, et leue the l’have dans tout a li est heu en its reached until then li jus de c cuers; si comme nos d ce nons et est de lign auit jusqu’s have to li les oe l’et, and son li has part of them parts: all du it.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	The understanding of this suture is to sew as a tanner does with hides.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And that you leave the edge from one side, and fold it over to the other, until the suture is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of suturing, which Galien describes properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	to leavez la proaire
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	When they apply one side of the sac to the other part in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle or nearby flesh piece and make an incision only at that spot.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two pieces of sac:
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	theta; Cannotte tad that dur ; it. C;llie chi s. Ik le are m et ce:
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	Two shoulders dislocated.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both the affected part down to its inner cavity in two other shoulders that are opposite each other side by side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the manner of suturing and it is most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	as they aret la les pacient if you can be not l’li de:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must insert one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And make sure that when the suture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If you. Doing; it thet filed sot they n's.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, in the same way as if an artisan had moved it.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then return the intestines and the knot; then put on the powder soaking chalk,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	:
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	Et qu’il cisele le fil, et soit solide son siège, et le miracle.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as with others, until it is sound;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no medicine, then apply as follows, soon when it starts to swell: wool and old cotton.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	When there is no need for other remedies when wounds are simply situated.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you suspect the wound has caused a connection with the main limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary to soak a thin linen cloth in boiling oil or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And place it back within the angles, and beneath the elbows;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if it feels pain or swelling in bumps, which often occurs,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If the enemas of black wine are too much, and mainly when the swelling comes up to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And it perforates internally, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cleanse than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The small intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is in distress.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is due to the positioning of the veins that they occur, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and their proximity to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the spleen falls from the wound, set it back as before like the intestines while fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is old and has become purple or black, one must bind the hollow that is black to prevent bleeding.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	ça they.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	Then hold what lies between the joints.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And place two pieces hanging from the part above the wound towards ease for extracting thorns, and to bow the wound.
de la routure dou boueil	From the treatment of boils
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	: ells quateres; also a s, aftert ine et de les pei:
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored at all by any means,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I see a gentleman was hurt with a belly of an arrow.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the abdebdom.
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	Et il fut enfoncé et devint fistuleux, et de cela il y eut la fuyade et les vomissements.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment as best I could, and did not stop observing until he was healthy again, and his wounds were closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the sickly one had not harm in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	And there is no harm, but it remains in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And some experienced individuals say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be treated in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Taking forceful pressure with large hands, then bringing together the lips of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when the froth has opened its mouth, place it between the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	If [the froth] stretches its mouth upward;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	And then tie the head with a bandage, and so it stays firmly that it cannot slip.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then apply another remedy as before, until the wound is fully healed.
et cout la plaie.	And close up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head settles into the intestines and causes no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	the not bd.
en teil maniere:	In a certain manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this intestinal string that is well cleansed,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	Then take the end of this thread of fine, and place it here:
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then insert the thread into the needle, and stitch the intestine, and reset the joint in its socket.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of suturing with threads is not contrary to the way of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it involves one of the vital organs in the intestines, there is no remedy or health, rather subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	From a fistula or where it may be found
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Say that any wound or abscess, when old, is universally called "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and particularly when it arises and grows thick.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	they don't be presente as heal in the ether, which is not:
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And so it is as if plucked like a bird's feather.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes with clear bowstring, and other times thickened;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	at times barely there, and other times adequately present;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	Et I have spoken in the division of wounds, that any wound not healed has no dressing.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is only due to one of these seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This means the following, namely by the smallness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	soi (g., and, just be sure.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there is hardness inside it, and on the lips, do not let blood appear.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or if there is too much bowing;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or if the flesh is wrinkled, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	they are:
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	When this corruption is a form of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or because the property in this area is delayed digestion, late health, and flees naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or there are wounds or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	the the et is byzlt (x.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to teach you about the treatment of an abscess, which is done by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Fistulae occur in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	sofels the painz. ould et:
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	Or on the spine of the back, or on any joint of hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it comes to affecting the primary property of the limb, and similar others.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind have serious healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	the s. Toi:
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you observe it to know, if taking a tent of flax or iron, where the fistula is straight, so take it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, search for a subtle tent made of linen.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because such a sore bends near its twistedness.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	And if there are blinded tumors on hands which you cannot well search by touch.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	And if it is cleansed by one of the blinded tumors.
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	The moisture is too close to an opening, and it becomes infected.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then you should properly dress it according to your ability, knowing if there is bone or nerve involved and which way the vein flows.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	And carefully ask the patient about the pain they feel upon pressure from your hand, and where it is located.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	When you know for certain the location of dislocation, whether it is far from a joint or nerve, artery, or vein.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	In none of the cases I have mentioned to you, if according to what I have said to you.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And furthermore the ailments that are within it and corrupted.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then the treatment until it is healed.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well placed in the right location, it is necessary to cut cleanly from the beginning as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then apply medicinal mud and let it dry up to the very top of the firmary.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	et so, that is not c:s tire sont icta les pus sod a quis and heal the same de:
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then you apply healing balms with holy herbs until they are well-dried.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if they do not dry by this method, then perform the cauterization as we have mentioned.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, treat it accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves trouble you or your principal limbs, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackening, until the king has removed all of the infected bone.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat such strange things until it becomes healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and untud:
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	Take care to go as far as necessary until you reach your destination:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it unravels and turns as much as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all decay, then restore to its original place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it remains thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if not, understand that the infection is too advanced, and you cannot approach it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other remedy than using the poultice.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	by that you dose:
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If an arrow is to be removed with a suitable instrument,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are any bones, ensure all fragments are removed, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	but if the situation is reversed due to moisture, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	so that it ne: unt ijangle; but not s f gue yse text de bavgust from: O and he said the boze que sont le ben
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	If you cannot remove them within an hour, place on the wound something repelling putrefaction.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until they are fully risen around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	then they will have lighter bones afterwards.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	que:t; the main they I l’s ie the mud so do not be noit; a
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you regularly rub away at the decay until all the blackness is bone.
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of decayed tissue, and it reaches down to the surface of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	*tous by.  (prindronze but it.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a fistula which occurred in one's leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you take this as an example and assist in your practice.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There were young boys 30 years ago who had pain in their leg from a cause that came from within the body;
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As long as materials came to the leg, and there was flowing from a large abscess, but no reason not to open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	But the doctors worked with such zeal that they opened up the abscesses too much.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they consumed a lot of materials, and it became an abscess, and much pus gathered that all went towards bowel and moisture in the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	by (th;
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	As long as I am called upon, and see his leg and the medicines with which he was treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what was needed through small openings for his large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the youth became red again, and had a citrus color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	:
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that one part approached another from all areas of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurried then and examined the opening until I discovered a piece of bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it decayed and pierced through, reaching up to the inner side of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	the text as it that they dontt a, and jus in; if you see iste:
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to heal the wound with medicinal substances for long periods of time, and could not be joined.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found continuous corruption in the bone, and its membrane, and then the bone itself, and I tried to join it again.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	par la s est croet ougte:
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then you will reset it with medicines; and it was quickly made whole and stable again.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	except to continue the treatment due to the weakness of the patient, who could not endure,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	as much if the for themt; also to dose patient:
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And it produced in the place of the bone a hard cyst, and was well-formed and had no harm or adverse effects at all, neither upon approach nor departure.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated as follows:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take a bandage and secure it to the head of the affected bone, where it protrudes.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	the (that n'z by ulcof Vigene c.u Nle t; If you give: aclos cee.
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	And place another band of linen thicker than the first, and tie it above the bone that is over the joint.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And extend the head so you can treat the corrupted cartilage from underne <br>
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And uncover the cartilange above the bone where you see it swollen, ensuring that the sore does not touch the cartilage.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a wedge or a splint under the bone to straighten the deformed joint;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And let them heal as one can see and feel the corruption, and still be treated further if needed.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If it unveils all of its flesh, then place a splint underneath; afterwards,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then bind the two parts together to remove the decayed tissue, and it should be sutured as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the decay is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and suture it to the bone or that which contains on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	When the corruption is continuous with both joints, there is no other remedy than to use heat.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the corruption is at the wrist or ankle, and it is a very strong condition,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	However, you must investigate the corruption, how exactly does it affect you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And clean it thoroughly in all ways you can, but let neither vein nor nerve be against you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And you must know that the cutting tools and needles for fixing these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance of the flesh.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and delicacy, and their length and shortness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to provide each type of work with its instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	the malad thereby: they do not; please; you can'i and so it e; You should (u;
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And witness to the symptoms of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you consider using the instrument you need according to what is appropriate;
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head swells or due to humors, or from excess.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have the medical treatment for that corrosion with medicines, and they do not help,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If the patient dies from this of death or wickedness, which is greater due to the defect in the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are such that the limb becomes blackened, appearing as if scorched by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and following this darkness, then there comes the consumption of the limb into other parts of the body.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	s as t li so that line;
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	When it is by the strike of venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar beasts,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the consumption is at the base of the two thighs, remove the flesh and do not give any space for it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, cut around the joint so that consumption does not spread to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	When it comes to the arm, if you bind with a bandage; and if it goes past the bandage, that is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there are no remedies other than in proportion to its usefulness;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And do so as when inflammation or pus comes: if it comes to the first joint, then bind after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	heal Js in t ecritt; but no ça and so ce d. They say that la pe's lessele ennecztroye de lore ym cite que don’s and li ;f; the old, se:
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	When it rises up to the leg, follow the joint of the knee.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but for the patient to apply cold compresses.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and wrap the member with either a cloth or linen bandage, wrapping it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	in de;
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments with a scalpel as wide as necessary until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then you cut or saw it, and place on each side a strip of linen, ensuring the incision does not reach the healthy bone.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And bring another injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	Et so ke t, TTPlesse not; EST; la ben; he said il ymileir lesi by enne t they the same.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	When you apply certain binding powders; then return to your medication until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you about an event that happened to one man in his dreams:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	s.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	The corrosion first appeared on his right elbow, so much so that it consumed the entire arm.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he cut off the arm with a broad knife, and was saved.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And after a long time, the corrosion returned to his hand's elbow, and it came towards me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I placed it upon things with rebounding effects after bodily purification, and could not stop the erosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he vowed that I should cover it with my hand, and I did not know if I could transmit the substance;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and also doubted that if I were to cut his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	3t some of a
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And if he breaks his hand, and is healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Nor do I know of any other methods except those that are necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	An abscess does not come forth in its proper place and remains for so long that it forms a large mass of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	the w est onde.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the skin above is as fine and delicate as a cut piece of cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not reach beyond the bone nor the nerve, thus such illnesses can be called "healed".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is termed by them "ulnarblee" is known as.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so swoln that it reaches up to the bone on either side, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	The cautery is such that you cut out the skin entirely, especially when it is thin like a cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not wait for its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you are sure that the skin is becoming hardened, and there is no rot in the center,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	they can be se prits un.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bow which is part of it has a foul smell.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then use the Egyptian medicinal clyster that is made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ease, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in a single vessel over fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	-L’re t�h: (thutir f. Jumplt en oudes man: CZ cechaise le ne l's forme est
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	Then take as needed according to your necessity, and make it with honey and water.
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And apply the charpierce pour ointments les... cillee aigue les oevres, si con nous avons apris eschalasse. Et si tu appliécharpiez les que nous avons apertisse au long: et prenet charpie qui estassee and les oeuvre piez s’es chierce en eauzez
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medication sit for two hours, then extract by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breast is formed again, and let bone form within it;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And never use an enema with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, take ashes of oak wood, and pour water over it.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then mix it, and use it for an enema until you are sure that the patient is well saturated.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the sick person cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water with ashes will be suitable.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	Commafuyssai:t. Do you may f la marse ben'obole (re the c: est ke that nusla mirjntry y ne e te les que don’s s ils line; at; et a...
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	When you cleanse with honey and mead of sweet wine, that honey has the property to purify and wash.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine causes the wound to dry.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when this is done, and you have ensured that the wound is well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the rectum produces a black stool from what it contains
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you must take an emplastron made of rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or the enema with certain remedies and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in treating ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If you widen it with a bit of iron, and apply an Egyptian ointment poultice.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilisk ointment, so that they may be widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, then cut a hole and leave just enough for it to enter or for a clyster to pass through,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	should be de s and o prassie t line is they are the ecorset so:
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the bow is in full tension, do not hang any weight on it.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if the bow is not straightened in such a way that it lowers as much as possible where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	the c eczar; then it s de le temps by et unt chere ou to prist ;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the wound from above as you see it,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If fitted thus: that the bow moves slightly downward, and nothing remains of the bowstring.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And take consolidative medicines to put on the wound,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	by the ou t s;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then apply force to relocate the dislocated joint at the shoulder, making it slightly wider than before.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	It is extended with a soothing ointment over an additional cloth according to the size of the dislocation.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And it is applied on top of the shoulder dislocation to alleviate swelling, and do not remove the large cloth forcefully until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	they witht;
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And know if it is poison or slight or sufficient, whether digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your treatment has extended in such a way that you see the nature of the wound through the chest,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that the breast is hot again and close to healing.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	Then remove it in the morning or after a day, and when you uncover the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If there is another dressing, change it and reapply the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	If it comes from subtle humors after long times, do not despair of health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For healing is nearing. For there are men who wrongly apply cold in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if bowels remain upset with flatulence after many days, believe that the breasts are not swoln.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	iste c; 41; f lor: c.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	If as an ointment it ends, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take the ointment that has ended, and make it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then put it into jelly and apply as such; It works the same for pains that are cooked swolled.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When certain oil applications are absent
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder with honey while over the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in a cloth, you wrap it, and spread it on the chest, never applying arsenic long.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	of:
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And it is used with simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and put on honey as I have said, and apply.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the ulcer is long, and it is not healed by this remedy,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Therefore say that infection is primary, and it exerts pressure on the bone or hard limbs or joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	When treating a fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	For the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Apocrine is an abscess that arises under the nail of the palm's pocket,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	here de so they should not the are no d nger so:
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	When it is dislocated again and no care is taken, a swelling arises.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they grow and burn away until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they consume it entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the ulcerations up to the bone, until there is painful stench and the cheeks are swolebreast wide, and the color becomes dusky.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	translation in t asm s vign; for.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary to cut away all excess flesh left from the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The fire-cauterization is of great help when the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	When an ulcer forms on the skin, it begins to throb, and swells.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	If it is necessary, place a poultice under the sore that throbs.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	And raise it gently to a higher position, and treat the sore carefully and lightly,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	Et place upon what remains of the burned and corrosive medicinal herbs to remove all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply poultices until it becomes healthy again.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the erosion is in the bone, and the skin peels off, because as long as the bone corrupts there, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	of, then lest t eck de les m that li cteles:
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat until it becomes healthy again;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is inflamed, boils up, and feels great pain, then one must first soothe it;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then trim the thick nail with a sharp tool across,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And guard so that the hand does not reach up to the cartilage just below the nail, for the patient would feel too great a pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it occurs, place something above it that provides relief.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the hand must be soothed
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	the tre:
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And sometimes there is no bone or joint involved, not even once.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	None of them originate at the root of the joint, where growth occurs in some we do mention.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that grow on either side of our bones do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and i thad:
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of one who is fleshly is lightweight in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Measure it at its root with a wide span.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the joint's root is difficult to treat; use your thumb for this.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	the b c f it; wa:
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then set the bone with an appropriate splint, then treat until it is sound again.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come with bone fractures occur through birth, or from the severity of a wound, or scorching heat, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to set that swelling, so that the bone may be mended according to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	. 0. Do not de la; if they; Ander; That, et so thatt of the skin ce que a certaine les bon, but c and there are the same; fornspier;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	When you place between two fine pieces of wood so that they are joined together, as is proper.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the joining comes to either of its ends with the palm, cover that joinery accordingly as it should be.
Des vils	Of evil things
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	the n't’s. ougre m not ce:
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more occurs with legs of those who go on foot and work and carry heavy loads than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore that you should administer an enema once and then purify with salt of the balsamic ointment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	to you doe li kit is then le chole cuy.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is for you to open the vein and stretch it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size as follows by this manner: raise the first leg with very hot water, until the large vein is sufficiently dilated.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the limb from above the hip to the part below the knee for the patient in pain.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	as yout he said:sst et the gagnte li est de b (cui est jato make a;
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then examine and draw out the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtue can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then filter it, and command that he dye his wounds with healing meats staining them black;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And begin the evacuation and cleansing again when the veins are clear, without harm to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	(X but en g.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then place it in a bath, and let the leg be immersed in warm water until it turns red, and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a bath, heat it on the fire and then apply a bandage to compress the veins long at the top of the thigh or in the area above the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then work with the skin around the wound and scrape off any excess veins until it feels smooth to touch.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	ous t n's, either le: the phl s.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then insert the rod without, until it is elevated to the skin, and then attach lightly with a bandage.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then wrap in another location three fingers above; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then lift to the forehead, as you have done before, and attach another bandage as initially instructed.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	theta; it is tre: (and or not m:
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then grasp and lift up to the second joint; then extract from joint to joint until it's fully freed, then cover.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot pull out and raise it, then insert a needle through all the thick strong thread.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And lodge and pull it out, then insert a rod through the hole, and turn your hand on both sides until it's fully extracted.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	by:
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it entirely, place a cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat until it is healthy again.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, and it is not straight as we have said:
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is necessary to cut it twistedly, but do not pierce it; and treat as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to make a cupping glass is curved, and does not cut, but it makes an incision in the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is a large bulge, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its form.
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	they; he donzer.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, as does happen from rot that arises under the hide.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	If as it comes within the body with snakes and veins, originating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if signs of this vein's onset are such that there comes a great inflammaturge in the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then change position of the joint, and begins the vein to protrude outwards, like a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	Once the head is repositioned, it must be wrapped with a bandage of linen about three and a half ells up to four ells, and the knot.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leaves the linen on the leg, and every time it comes loose, wrap it around again with the bandage and knot.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	; t
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	When you cover it, it enters the flesh again, and brings about an abscess and putrefaction there, and a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this matter, it must be treated little by little until complete, and leave nothing of the body or flesh.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And it is never at any time when this vein is treated with 5 or more long palms.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	they leave the chest; ouger le:, and no matter: the c; If you don's. The most to not be pleased thatt s. I, so as far.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If it persists entirely; and the matter within should be emptied, then replenish with healing herbs daily for a day, then treat as one would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never should you touch the vein with dirty hands; especially when it is opened near the joint of the foot or ankle.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there comes much swelling, and from which pus flows; then treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	they:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is called in our land "ox disease" because it often occurs on the buttocks.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that forms between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body ascending and descending.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and feels quite well from limb to limb as it traverses through the skin where it goes, and jumps strongly;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	c quite the.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its effectiveness, for when it moves through the body, it rises to the head and reaches the brain.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	Sometimes it may return, destroying the brain; this often occurs.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see them draining and extracting, one cannot force it when it moves:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	dose tale;
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then place a cowpat on it and bind with a bandage; if the vein is fully filled in at its base, you will not find it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If the fire cautery is placed there, let it remain until it heals;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and its greatest harm lies in that it may cause an oil leakage as we have mentioned.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	the misis f (m and so c; The Couvser the t, et a bles la s.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is proper to instruct the sick person in internal body cleansing with soluble medical substances for removing bad humours.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if they consume rotten meats leading to putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	And the pain that arises from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	and s which are to the w;
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And thus it moves from limb to limb, and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called by an ill woman, and found redness in the vein of her arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And shortly after, I saw it rise as well as a worm on the shoulder;
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	m
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain departs from there, and sets in the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then shortly after it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then he told me that it returned to circle around the body as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Indeed, I desire to maintain that those who wish well should move pain from one place to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I have not seen it so, as in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because women had dry bodies and exposed veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	the in which they are not s.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear as expected due to this reason among those who are discharged, and have damp bodies and veins replaced.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And those who ite est recouvre lief seur les poiluz; and soient a les cheir.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If gently pushed above and below steadily, and then wrapped tightly until the swelling subsides at its place.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And cauterize there; if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If a treatment for those who have feverish symptoms, like foul pills and serpentine herbs, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Of arrowheads
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrowheads are of various kinds, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they embed themselves.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety among them is such that there are some with large points, and small ones, and those with barbs, and tanged.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	it comes in the same bytie ones:
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	And that which leaks from any limb does so in two ways: or it leaks from a principal member
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Or as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it leaks from any part of these organs, the sign of death that I will now tell you becomes apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	s (or; that t; the les la par:S. And so you sayt not they nouns
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When these mal signs are not visible to you, and there is no arrow protruding from the wound, then treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And if the sign of the brain appears when the arrow pierces and splits the bone, and a blood clot rises above where it is in the skull.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there are blindness and headache and vertigo and reddening of the eyes, and inflammaturition of the tongue, and muscle spasm and mingling of understanding, and bile-induced vomiting.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	by c’s: in sondous text the dur they arentaine est thumpar; s'mermial and le tj.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And leaps from the wound wet white like hairs, and as it dries like black charcoal.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if these signs appear to you, proceed with the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not fully embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign when the arrow falls out or touches flesh is that it's close to the left arm, and feels as if it were lodged in something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	they don; please; If you mayn: the b (XIXt2. Md:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Then there arises doubt as to death approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of arrow wound is that its normal appearance does not have plain foam coming from the wound; instead, the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, they gasp loudly, and ask for cold water.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces into the abdomen near the ribs, then it is close to small intestines; and produces a lot of pus and great pain and gasping; and all limbs shake uncontrollably.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	they le T1 is:t's (b J. Do so: M. The 5-e a, the pique by;llt'm and m, but n’d.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	When the arrow falls into the belly and does not exit through the intestines, there is no hope for its recovery or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder and the urine does not pass through it, causing strong pain to the patient; know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as it is made and the neck and throat and shoulder and joints and spine of the back and ribs and thighs, and the limbs appearing to be safe, according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to him that an arrow lodged in the base or near the root of his nose.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it; and [I] pierced from another side through the ear fat, and was without any harm or considerable pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	t: they should on ce: Targl’s t (bours les et sfors that n'd est d; so par the line ses ti.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow was reset, but could not reach further than the tip towards its end.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it was an arrow from a Turkish bow, made entirely of light iron without any ears; the yew was whole, and no harm befell it at all.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And an arrow pierced the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	Et de l's t�; puis ilk pr
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And you encounter an arrowhead lodged within one bone, near the belly, fearing that it would be his death.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, he showed no change in condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrowhead, manipulated it skillfully, successfully extracted it without any adverse occurrences.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a house where an arrow has fallen on it head or back, and there is a wound just formed above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remains inside, not altering its natural position.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor does it cause harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	and not the c as they so that s in a do
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	Thus it persists without significant pain, and there are many similar occurrences.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And pierce an arrow into one of the king's sides, which was located in his lower part.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it is slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrowhead is fully embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	:
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	In all this you must show subtle skill, and do not feel it yourself.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt no pressure or pain from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought that it was the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	est s.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw the hinges of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put the emploaster on his hands for a long time and bandaged the wound tightly, which kept the patient in great pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	Until he felt the arrow within himself one day; and then he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I place on the wound a corrosive medicinal water for many days until it is opened.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and tried, feeling the head of the arrow returning to its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then placed at the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicinal water until I could clearly see the head of the arrow.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	them ift so bye lesse: the bostrange; and de le chi s a (s tissued is d.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	Then you must spread out the wound so that I can insert pincers on it, and squeeze from both sides, and they cannot come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I did not cease to subtly apply and engineer various methods of treatment until on a day with well-made pincers,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to how the wound will appear at the end of this chapter, I treated it and left the wound uncovered.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	zie c a;
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I will restore it accordingly; then the wound is closed, and the patient is completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Here's the translation of that line: "Or have I told you about the quality of arrow extraction."
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	The translation is as follows: "so apply your care to what I do not mention here, for the book cannot fully instruct you;"
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	line me:s.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	True work consists of nine operations and tools, for dealing with extraordinary things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrowheads lodged in the limbs are removed in two ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by pulling them out where they entered or from another direction;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	in the text so that's dont monde emt and m d.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	If it does not heal now, let the joint rest until it becomes supple again, and allow for drainage.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And similarly if it is fixed in the bone and cannot be removed, let it rest for some days, moving slightly each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then when it heals, if it does not heal, carefully drill a small hole all the way through, until the bone around is fully penetrated, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	say I so not the line J. 1; that he c.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And of the occurrences I have mentioned to the patient openly: do not milk it, but let it rest until it becomes balanced after several days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	because if the arrowhead comes up to the skin, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrowhead is lodged only in the bone and does not come out of the skin,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And it causes patients to remain for several days with lingering pain, if not addressed properly.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is excessively stuck and cannot be removed easily, then administer plasters around it as I have told you; then heal the wound until it is sound again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	ande: nus, soient loung et que il te me, all the s unt pour is.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then apply any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	And if you cannot for widening of the wound, and for deepening of the arrowhead;
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And there are no bones or tendons or veins, so that the wound is as large as possible;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	And extract the arrow if you can see it, and if there are ears at which it holds.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If the bone is partially driven in by two parts that you can see,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can extract it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	is the s, they pxt a petit that mon: soforsin Latin ift et e t c;'s;
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot reset it once, let it reach the joint before moving forward and then extract it, as the extraction would be painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the condition of blood causes adverse effects, follow what we have said about treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and be cautious of incision on the nerve and veins, and use a device as you know to draw out the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	so the bon tre t:grfquent and c.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	This is the greatest aid it can be, and if you cannot do so, follow as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that enters from another direction, or opens up something within it, or where the skin is swollen noticeably:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Therefore make an incision there, as long as you can hold with pincers, and then extract it: if the arrow is protruding now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	them irt by exam t Orel Zequere ben: C; if theisse.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	If it cannot come out, leave it for now, then resume extraction until it can be withdrawn.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if the arrowhead remains in it, remove it completely from all parts.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if the shaft has been cut, and you see that you need to apply a dressing, then use this particular instrument for it.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	t s croix car ;
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	When an arrow is embedded, if it is with a pointed instrument entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, you must scrape all flesh around where the poison is, if possible.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	If the arrow falls out or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is recent, cover with a cup if possible.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful not to cover the vein or nerves, then extract it, and then close the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And care for it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	est bonte que il fit de cat, thent un m; and: ca:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrow shaft.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape at the tip of the hair is also like the feathers of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	To insert at the tip of the arrow, as shown here.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	to use pliers for inserting and selecting, as shown here.
des voinnes dou cors communes	common bodily illnesses
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	the text; it is nothers if you see:
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is to say: two bellows located behind the ears, called "herbéch".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries which are in the temples visible;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	the hairsis de la crople ce n’m, and les nece d that ones.
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	When the vein is within the forehead, and the veins are near the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two vessels that lie above their eyes.
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, which are called "aqueducts."
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	they should de lign:
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins of which there are commonly five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	the one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and they call them "the common people's vein" (or simply: The main vein).
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilica.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call it "the vein of life"; and it is located on the right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call it "the vein of the belly," and it lies above the groin.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And it's that one which we sense, clearly palpable over the groin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the valvula is the vein situated between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the hollow of the left side of the thigh.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "nose", that is in the aneckle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	it;
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The blood of veins located behind the ears also helps with ancient plagues, and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And its quality of blood, as I have told you, is that you must raise the head of the patient.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And cleanse the area or where the veins are with a rough cloth; then securely tie off the patient's neck with a bandage.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	Until both veins appear behind the ears, one on each side depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Take them with your two fingers and where you feel hair above your elbow, grasp firmly.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the scalpel, and push it through the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	de li's c s crovice ça:
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and tie it, until it is properly aligned.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have previously said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healing of the two arteries that are located in both temples when it is ancient scurf.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And swelling, and habitual paralysis, and watery tears from the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and its quality is such that it is just as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it's the sickly who has his neck extended so much that both veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	Et dis-car:
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the flesh above the vein with your index finger towards you, and insert the lancet from under.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And lift the vein upward, and the skin, just as you have done with two other veins, then allow blood to flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then lay down the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	they it's the same f
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding from the forehead is equal to the bleeding for headaches and other old-age diseases of the face, such as migraines and rheum.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its nature is that the patient twists their neck until bleeding appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called 'fossor', which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then instruct the patient to open the neck, and tie the vein until it is taut and one-way preventing any backflow with a broad flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it must not be that the flame is too sharp; and if straight downwards, because the bone is near, and occasionally breaking the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The drainage of the two veins that are in the temples helps with the eyes, and twitching, and redness, and inflammation near the eyeball, and diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	The quality of their health is such that the patient twists his neck by pulling any ligament, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the sane (sanity), and let there be health of the spinal cord, a little long, slightly wide, for it has no flaw.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the spinal cord is delicate, perhaps it breaks; then make the incision in the blood vessel, as much as you need, and then tie off at the edge of the cut, securely fastening it.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	rofit the t themd to 9
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	If as a migraine and redness come to the face, especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	then if the quality of health is such that the patient clenches his neck, then strain your left hand to it.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a thin thread long, and insert it between the lips at the space that is between the two nostrebs,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	s sofid:
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not move it too quickly or forcefully, and let it heal according to your needs, then leave it alone for a night, as it is restored quite soon.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the shape of the wound:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	: if he f. ici-ciel est c’on done;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	The quality of sickness is such that the patient strains his neck from under both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master be present over the patient's head, and the patient sits on one of the seats,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then sew the vein for a short distance long enough, then treat the wound promptly as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then perform a new procedure on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently compress the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And do not let the patient be bound, and leave him until morning so that the wound can heal.
De la sainie des leivres	From the illness of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sickness of veins on top leads to dryness in the mouth, and gum decay, and splits in the lips, and bad breath and inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of such sickness is for the patient to sit before you, and strain their neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	the s't; they are not
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And you recognize them by how they are black, and because there is fine black veining around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	So that both may be treated together; and if you do not recognize them, causing doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If the larger of each is split open, and also make incisions on both sides above and below it, because they are made in the same manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the swelling underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Li swelling of the veins that are beneath the tongue is associated with the swelling of the head, and it's related to throat stretching, and eye diseases, and mouth ailments.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the characteristic of swelling is that patients may feel pain between their hands in sunlight, and they lift the tongue, and look down each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	it m c (t; la :l.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of which we commonly drain, are drained by two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or by pinching all with one of the following tools: either a broad leather punch or an olivewood sharpener, and it is called "needle-like".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are both wide and thin according to the width and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	f;
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary to open veins with clear blood that contains much blood and turbidity.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it takes the form of an olive-like bubble:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle pointed, and used to drain subtle veins where there is delicate yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is proper for the healer to sanitize thoroughly, and that he washes of the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it is necessary to cauterize, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it must not be sutured too tightly, but cut cleanly like a thumbnail.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	the-t lesso scath:
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	If you wish to locate any vein of his, or if you suspect it is in its place within the arm: it is clearly visible.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And take care with the scalpel at the femoral artery as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the location of the sinew, then as well as removing the arm, you should touch the flesh until you can feel the hairs.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	You so:
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	When you see the vein swoln, do not wound it for that is an artery; flee from it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see a swelling rising as the urine of a child does, and the vein is red and fine, know that it is an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Haste yourself away, and place your hand over it lengthily, then remove the hand if possible where often occurs;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	s, and est:**llt a small.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not closed and it bleeds, and there are no medicines available, tie off the artery if it opens, as holding back the blood at its source; then close the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fresh ivy bark, and break it, then take one half and bind it tightly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound is not closed properly, it is good; if not, then use the treatments we have said, of powders that stop bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	The inflammations are not always due to various positions of the small area of the wound, and the strength of the limb's joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The venous bleeding greatly helps by draining blood from above in the head and below in the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	for it is composed of the navel and head as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it is necessary for the nurse to wash with vinegar where the nerve lies beneath, and if it pierces too deeply, he finds the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it swells and the sickness becomes severe, and sometimes cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this opened nerve occurs many times, and if it cannot be found in any man due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you clean the instrument carefully; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	When there is a vein between the two nerves, it causes great pain.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The headache of the cerebral nature draws blood to the head and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is appropriate to apply pressure to the olive or myrtle bone because it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries within them.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek a lighter position, and do not strain anything if the first time does not succeed, and start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And perhaps this affects some people's bodies in such a way that they must try the first time, but do not strain anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing is as you think it should be.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	, so: if-;
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	To avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And to make it well in one of the three veins that are known as orifices: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and femoral.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should commence to bleed when the signs of fullness appear after breakfast and in autumn and winter after eating.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And if it must be treated within the first day or second, after 2 or 3 hours into the next day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment for illnesses is not fixed in hours but should be done when needed during the day or night, at all hours and always.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not appropriate to treat children up until 14 years old or women who are seven months pregnant at most.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	the patient. The l’s the first, then they;
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to heal themselves, no matter how, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there is an excess of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out the surplus from the intestines harming the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	It is not proper for those who are too lean from meats or drunkards, no matter how much, nor droplets.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	:s.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then delicately balance the humors, if they are too large, with foods and drinks and medicines, provided you have them available.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Next, place or bathe it, unless anything prevents it, to subtly adjust the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and cleanse the vein where the wound is located, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	by.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And be bound and swung, and have the healer stand higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then strain the joint slightly, for if it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct it without discomfort.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the area with both hands until the veins become swoln and are felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	t;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	That the vein does not break upon being struck with a blow.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that escape as quickly as cords in the hands of a shoemaker, and some have such great blood flow.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	that when you press upon it, if the veins retreat away from the pressure, and cannot be opened, then one suffers thus.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	the issue; de l's ine:
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; if not, begin again a little lower than where you initially started, unless the bone is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	If the bone is swolebe, and the patient hopes, allow it one or two days rest without binding the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps an abscess may arise again; do not bathe, then resume healing if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	theta. And shed the same and there; short to t. T-t that they. <l ten their Melle ce by œuvre; (the ; of oureob;s e present after 1, with a; s as a dur; this en la crom;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And use a bit of haste with the work so that the wound may swell; for this often happens when the injury is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound swelling, do not repeat the cleansing, and apply a little bit of oil, for it eases the pain in this place and is absorbed by the wound as if it were clay to the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the oil with each vein you cleanse, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	ici
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if it comes to large abscesses that occur many times, especially when the opening of the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you act quickly, place a damp sponge soaked in warm water and salt on it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And after the blood has been drained from the vein, and if there remains at the site for several days any black or green discoloration, it does not harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	mane and: 1 the her plexi;
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance of the sinew in the lower part: therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the area tender to the pressure of your hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be sure not to place anything as we have mentioned on it, for perhaps there may be an artery involved; but give a dry poultice to harden the wound, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each type of blood according to its quantity and color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see a large wound, leave it open until it becomes thinner; and if it's too hot, allow it to cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And one who is bald and bare should have blood drawn, so make the wound larger with wider slits.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite and strengthen them often with small doses, and it should be done by cutting crosswise, not poking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This way of healing prevents blood deterioration and nerve compression, and it is effective whether the joint is long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those whose body needs the joint, you should give them pounded meal mixed with juice of red apples; if they are chilled, bleed three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they are of a cold constitution, serve them pounded meal in syrup with juice, or in honeyed syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it is swollen from the wound, after the loss of much blood, one must give an infusion of warm wine and a sweet-smelling subtle syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And employ other remedirs that we have mentioned in the section on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to drain the arms, and bandage at other times as needed when greatly swollen, so that it is drained little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	. This bone;
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	When one wishes to heal another part, it must be done on the second day or third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that has become heated, and it causes fever; therefore, one must draw out a large quantity and dilate the veins until they bleed freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	once you have healed all the ailments and placed your hand over his eyes when they are sleeping, that death does not come while it is weak.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	by th's:
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary when you see the arm dislocated, to draw blood a second time, and if the artery is closed, press firmly above.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is curved, quickly straighten the arm, for that would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	But let it heal the second time; or if you do not reach to where there is no flame of blood, wait until the artery in the vein has ceased bleeding.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	After that they: ihe t;
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, leave it unbound until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed again for blood the second time, drain from there just as before, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins within the arm are drained at the location of the head vein because it is composed thusly.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	c d but he t ecore et y marow nd theirs. And the text:
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then securely bind it so that the vein appears well, then cauterize now across its length, not too wide or too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the wound be wide open, and properly cauterize near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it. Then place the hand in hot water, and allow blood to flow into the water until there is enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is severe, do not reinsert the hand in hot water, for it should be put into cold water more often than warm.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	byzard as (Xd't so far;
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The bath for the sore on the right hand is suitable for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand and apply hot water until the veins are filled, as long as you can see them.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if it's sore across (the palm), and you cover it completely with a poultice made of everything, do not cause any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	the same and you by the d
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Then rewarm the hand with hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and a bandage to join it quickly, and do so for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The remedy of the sinew in the left hand is good against mouse disease, and do everything as I have told you on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	iss�. Toi; c.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	If like diseases of the bones, retention of flowers, and disease of veins, and of old buttocks and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the nature of its health is such that the patient often throws up blood into warm water, and rubs over the vein until it heals.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and lies above the joint of the foot; and the vein is near the ankle, and many streams go under the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	s c (e:
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you are feeling under the foot, beware of the nerves that lie beneath, and tend to the vein as when grafting; let the swelling remain narrowed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if blood cannot flow out, reset the foot in water, and ensure the vein empties well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if healing fails on the first attempt, start again a little higher as the bone is still tender.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	;
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The origin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its lining corresponds to the pain in the thigh when it's full of blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the nature of its lining is such that the patient lies down and stretches out above the ankle by four fingers while bent.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise it does not open up; and if it opens, then the lining in all ways that you can see, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	by Sons de la chamela (B; f.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	If you do not reset it properly, select any rope or cloth to bind around the arm and back of the elbow, and towards the small finger, and protect from pressure.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And do so until you see the bleeding stop, then loosen the tie and place cotton underneath, and hold it in place; now it is cured.
Des sainies de ventouse	Pouces de vache
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blood-letting is done with horns, or glass, or crystal; and phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this phlebotomy that is done without pricking has two methods: it can be heated to high temperatures or just slightly heated.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And phlebotomy that is done by pricking and drawing blood is performed in fourteen locations on the body.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	The reason one is all atop the head, and the other is within the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in the ribs of the neck; and the pus from under the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the pus from the two shoulders; and the pus on the elbows;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	:
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And of the pustules on both ankles; and bleeding does not occur from ventousing, only small droplets scattered in the vessel.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And for this reason, no healing occurs without improvement, as with vein treatment;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	It is not necessary that it be arranged or warmed with fire or any sense of heat, in any illness arising from overindulgence, as long as all the body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illness it is required to fast, or for habits, then let us practice each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in every moment.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they need to fast, become hungry;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, head, neck, and in the eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollete tongue, and bleed;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are those who think and see by wounds and injuries and other things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we instruct to attempt resetting after three hours past midday.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saint juice of musk assists in strengthening the head... which comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after evacuating all fluids from the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this purging is akin to the musk-based remedy for head strengthening,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it is not necessary for those who are of cold constitution to use it, or have choleric temperaments, as it causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore it is not necessary for them to use the veillarts, nor those who suffer from cold head ailments.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are afflicted often become numbness, and for this reason the bladder must be placed slightly lower due to suspicion of compliance.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The ventilation within the neck is of the sinew and base of the skull, and for this reason it extends to the lengthening of flesh.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	has been cite: d’unet heu est to pain they can be l'intes untiz ee and, li the sainte of embet: ougamble. If you s; lesm de la en them. The m ventre dou it a, for hissed
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it needs to be done gently, for if held too firmly, there may be strain on the bowels or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The enlargement of two ribs near the neck causes headaches, and otitis media, migraines, strangulation, and pain in the roots of teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is near the bladder of the kidney; and you must instruct the surgeon to apply his hand correctly, not cutting the artery or causing blood flow from it.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	that n’d c un les mains the:
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The hernia of the shoulders is an illness that arises from heat and distension.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The hernias of the groins are as much as from three veins in the arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	Because it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instructs the sinew to not stretch too much, for it is full of cartilage and veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cushion which is above the buttocks also serves for hemorrhoids and disorders below, and it must be large and made of linen, needing to be well rubbed; and sometimes, if it were too delicate, it might break; causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the veins of the legs swell openly, they draw blood from all over the body; they are effective for ancient pains of cold rain, and urination, and bladder problems; and they relieve the throbbing of the two shinbones, and both ankles, and in any case, they weaken the body after long use, bringing pain to various dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cuff is that you first put it on an empty vein and quickly squeeze it off, then place it hastily, and move evenly, continuing without stopping until you see the redness and swelling of the vein, and blood appears pink; then release, remove the cuffs, and observe the body'cuish position because there are some who have tanned skin and clear pores: if it is necessary to prick only once, make wide and somewhat deep incisions; squeeze gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to make a fine opening for the thick blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the bone is very thin, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we only do so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish to draw out much blood, let us repeat often; and if the bone is thin, strike it deeply, ensuring that the cores are punctured cleanly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And for those who have thick and hard skin and are prone to swelling, you must use the suction of oil poultices that are astringent and solvent.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	as abole tc's the t.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If it is with olive oil, of watercress, or of lily, or chamomile, or any similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of aniseed, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And for those whom you are treating with tender skin and large veins, do not apply any oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or blackthorn water, or squash gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with much moisture should rise easily, or use myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of sea-holly, or anise and chamomile infusions, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not appropriate to perform suctioning before or during the bath nor after, but an hour or two hours after the bath; and do not sleep immediately after suctioning.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary that he rests when it should be suctioned and when already suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are pale from illnesses, and whose blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	with:
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And small meats such as capons, and roast of chestnuts, and moistened meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with cold temperaments should take a syrup of honey, and moderate-aged wine that is neither old nor new, along with small portions of meat, young meats like capons, and small birds and partridges.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he exercises vigorously, one should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	that est they may be and l's the o:n ma muest; it’l’t.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it is necessary to subtly straighten them out, but one must not do so unless they have been heated with warm drinks.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cups that are placed without causing pain are those placed over the liver, and joints, and gout, and on the abdomen, hips, and legs, because these limbs do not tolerate being struck there.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And it is done only to draw blood from one member to another.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	When we treat the hips as if they are not healed; to remove the swelling that is in the limb, just as we place pumps on the belly and groin to reduce the size of the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and ease the pain when there is swelling or stones, then attract it by chance with an attraction to relieve the swelling, or remove the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and so do when placed on the liver and groin where there is retained windiness,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these blisters are arranged empty for leaching only; and at no time are they filled with both fire and water, respectively.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	As in illnesses of the lungs, and in such a manner that one fills the blister with hot water, or water to which he has boiled aromatic herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of filling the blister with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	line; and s c’s the estnt e le se che:et la jumboze que.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it is from an arrow, gently placed before so as not to startle the patient when applied to the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and should there be need for a staff made of an arrow or iron crosswise, in order to place a splinting device.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they shall vary in size both large and small according to the nature of these diseases and the condition of those who suffer from them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's pustules are different from old ones, and for lean ones like fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must place this pustule upon the limb thusly:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	grasp the candle of wax or some ointment, and place it within the pustule across the shaft that is inside the pustule,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	s.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then place it above the limb, and position your thumbs as we have said, so that when you wish, a hole appears, and insert the bladder.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And press along the line as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the bladder that is used for pneumonia, without any rod or tube, it's only made ready when filled with water, and placed on the limb completely.
et c’est li forme:	s. icy as a1, and ebetire; If yout (that la Crot. The text conta, so m est they: OU:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Dislocations are not amended unless in limbs where one cannot apply cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in large blisters of chafing, such as hands or feet, and similar ones.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is that when you find dislocations that are in smooth waters, if they can be grasped.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	the w the i believe le de la jf; If you cannot that:5 ben their:
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then cleanse of veins and bandages, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply dressings.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are plain and warm, if the location allows for placing a bandage, then apply it, as this is most beneficial afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not possible, lift the area lightly and thoroughly wash with water, then squeeze well;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	the paragraphs issons.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	If there is a multiple occurrence of pus, apply crushed vitriol or scurvy, and similar substances, until it is dried up.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Apply on the affected area with pounded fresh fennel leaves and let them dry up at their own pace, now seal it.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if more is needed, take other materials.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the vessels do not wish to be drawn, rub the area with fresh blood or where you insert a needle until they flow.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then place them back in position, and as soon as they feel their blood again, let them rest.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they bleed, then powder with a bit of aloe and crushed silex or ash, which will stop them now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This book of fractures begins
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they involve the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son of a bishop, that the ignorant physician should be immersed in this chapter, for they have never seen such writings or letters before.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	I can do not effolk to make a w, as he castry chapiste de:
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing from it, whether by the knowledge of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have acquired its wisdom, and by experience, and through the customs of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described here in this chapter what is contained within it, and shortened it at the end, clearly showing the forms of remedies that are made, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say or preface of this book the essence of its words and chapters in which the wise place their understanding, staying close to truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	When fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur in any limb, one must support the injured party on both sides with a splint, unless something else entirely is required due to frailty of body, children, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the tension is not too great or overly cold, one should avoid raw, cold drinks (such as water from ice), and fowl and horse dung, do not drink wine nor consume fatty foods, and do not eat excessive amounts of meat that fill the veins with blood, until there is no doubt about a hot abscess or spreading material in the limb; then it becomes necessary for the patient to resume their usual diet.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, one should nourish the patient with foods that promote growth, such as those causing viscosity (as cooked wheat in water), beets, eggs, liver, veal stomach, and offal, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar items.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	In certain cases of dislocation, movement is restored quickly but then fractures occur soon afterward.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that aged and brittle bones cannot be repaired or joined back together according to their nature for limb strengthening, nor those as in young children's bones.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not cure, reset the large tendons that are strong and join the limb together, until it is reinforced as before; and perform all of your work, and for this reason one must nourish with fatty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	to (a:
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	The fractures of the head are different from those of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that resemble an arch, and others like sharpening wood, similar to the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that's just a tiny split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	les. TSAdigulement res crubon de annex by his (aole.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	Et il est connu que la fracture d'os se produit parce qu'elle est tordue et ouverte largement, et elle touche près du poignet.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	Et quand il n'y a pas de torsion ou toucher d'en haut, et que le malade ne ressent pas beaucoup de douleur, alors qu'il n'y a pas de fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	Mais cela peut tout de même y avoir torsion, ou fente, ou petite fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	; d the so plee ond;
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which occurs with movement, and are the two disjoined parts, they must now be aligned evenly, as abscesses do arise.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess arises there, leave it untouched for a while, until the abscess is soothed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then make it equal to the movements that you can easily and gently do, and know that the restoration of it is easier than those where there are broken bones; then strain it as needed later on.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	s; they thatd. the t2e are l's but  ben bon en tient byc;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And put the limb back into its natural shape so that when broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset them by all means in their places as best as possible, and ensure through your work there is no injury or pain to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And properly align both ends of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if the patient's hand feels not quite right to you: clean it well, and do not strain or press it too much as those who bring forth abscesses and constrictions through their work often have done, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	When the limb is at risk, properly instruct the patient not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, turning or in any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	Because when it feels no pain, then it may not be fully healed yet, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	the final the other so please that on her;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	The quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	That broken limbs vary in size and extent and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	the ou l’mn taktura t. ous m.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are large, like thigh and leg: it is appropriate to encircle with a wide and strong ligature, for the wide ligature encompasses the entire large limb evenly, ensuring no uneven tension.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then place strips of light bandage on it, three or four turns according to the limb size, and tighten with your hand slightly along the entire ligature, then go above the break and tighten less than before, so the fracture is gently separated.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the ligature gradually and gradually until you grasp a large part of the healthy bone, then take another ligature and wrap around it correctly over the fracture site;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the fracture and restrain it gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first lesson above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the splints linen or cloth strips so they are all evenly spaced, then tie it above with one bandage, and then put well-made stays underneath if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or swelling, place something warm to soothe the abscess and draw out the pus, and leave it like that for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain over the bones, and let them be wrapped in a bandage of moderate width made from wood used for making grooves, or reeds of palm fronds, following this pattern.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, it is necessary that the bone placed over the break be a little larger and wider than the others:
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And be as long as it should for the size of small or large members.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	le OT some t 1.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	Greater width is less tension, as it should be. It is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of men who twist lengths for linen threads, it causes great error, for the spindle cannot be equal if too fine, and it must not have less than two spaces between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the nails after pulling them out in their healthy places, then apply cotton or cloth scraps between them so they do not pierce through.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment as follows.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And remember that it does not require extracting all splinters from the fractured limb on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it does not require inserting splinters until after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the risk of heat setting in.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	sh� t the covmuse th*; do:
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of ointment for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take resin, laudanum, elecampane root, asafoetida, gum arabic, etc., about 12 parts; myrrh and aloes, about 5 parts; benzoin .viiij. parts; and in a powder form, honeycomb with beef fat; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this ointment as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another ointment method for twists: take beef fat and myrrh, about 12 parts; myrrh and aloes, about seven parts; benzoe resin six parts; Armenian balm ten parts, pound well, and mix with water or honeycomb fat, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of salve for joints and bones dislocated from their place, and alleviates arising pain, and the breaking: take fresh lamb fat and flour mixed with oil heated, and apply it thereon. These salves do not restore, but they are good to soothe a hot abscess, and properly relieve pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to set broken bones: take dry leaves of fig trees and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to set broken bones and alleviate an abscess: Take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour from each part; grind them together and mix with wine. If the limb is swollen, soak it in moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another more effective way to set broken bones and treat the member during abscess healing: Take valerian roots, flax seeds, balm, mustard, mallow, violet flowers, and chamomile, from each part; grind them together and mix with saltwater or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb for healing other than wax and oil mixture, and it should be of neither too hard nor too soft consistency.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And according to Galen, on must apply dry and slightly warm substances such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things for healing a broken limb, as we have said before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering for injuries and pain: take crushed mullein and chamomile flowers or feathers of birds, and wormwood, all in equal quantities, grind them together, and make the plaster with honey.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then gently move it again afterwards, and be cautious to ensure the patient feels no pain, nor has moved the bone from its place; do not dislocate by force.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of relief or swelling is present, hurry and dislocate, and remove the splint now; take a light cloth, dampen with sea water, and dip in clean water, and lift up the place, until the itching ceases, and pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap in dry bandage, moistened with rose oil or warm water, and tie on a poultice, until you are sure of any hot boil.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And rest the inflammation of the limb, and be to the bone its pain, then resume subtle resetting, and a bit of plaster, and do not stretch it as strongly as before; and continue delicately until it is healthy again.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and bandages, when you resume as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it until after three or four or five or six days; and never leave it unset for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the breaker is healed, and approaches the joint above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then you must restrain it more than before and the swelling increases as I have said earlier; and if you see that the place dries out more than necessary, know that no healing can occur.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	arise from hot water baths every time you loosen it, and do this each day, and soak a little longer.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	by this method, you will relieve the swelling in the limb, and hasten what skilled physicians do to return the member correctly: it is wrong, and these methods are fearsome, and I see nothing else but pain and direct work.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways to break are there, with diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because there are breaks made by the percussion of swords, and the shafts cut all through the bone up to its marrow, as is done with an axe or stick; thus this manner of breakage is called "hachures".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	it is not s and sentence of the f for:
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	If there is an impacted object, or crack or stone shards, or falling on stones, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a hernia that reaches the skin close to the bone, or above it, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the bones are percuté in a l'encloset ele.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	When the wound is made by being struck with an arrow, falling, or other similar things, and allows entry of the bone fragment downward, it causes the head to be positioned as hot pots are on their stands when they tip over onto one another; the arrows become lodged inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more in those who have bones that are soft like children's bones;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these kinds of fractures where small fragments are not removed, as is the case with such injuries; and I will speak about them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures from the pull above them, and investigation with attempts, and by the corrupted cartilage which is below.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when an bone is discovered and rubbed over with heat, it shows the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, beware of any malaise by accident, and if you see no ill-fated accidents such as vomiting black bile, loss of mind, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, do not heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an easily hopeful injury, and if you expect healing, then begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the swelling comes to you first, and it is in winter, then remove the bone after the fourteenth day on which you can move.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh underneath the bone becomes corrupted and come the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	and the t� Ca.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	When bleeding progresses and reveals the bone or abscess head, use whatever is necessary for treatment, and ensure to fill its place with milled cloths in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And allow the wound to rest until the abscess heads are soothed, and be assured of bleeding; then begin around the bone to excise, and this is done in two ways of treatment: one way being that you cut at the narrow edge frontwards, resulting in its shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision wider than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method involves having various types of pincers, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of iron wire; in light work, do not strike the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	If the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you drill around it, making indentations with tongs without piercing beyond the skull of the head, ensuring a margin or circle at the tip so that the point does not pass through the bone; and you must have several, so each comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, having tongs for all tests (types); these are the three ways of making tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for drilling around the bone is to place a tong on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tong slightly and do so all around, making a cut with the incisors between the punctures, doing this more delicately than possible, lightly, as we have said, until you come across the bone to your hand or any of the instruments that you have like pincers.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have cut the bone, and pulled out a piece, it is necessary to remove the protrusion that remains from the bone to any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more delicate and finer than the other chisel.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there is nothing left of small bones or scales, then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is what the Galenians call it, which is more effective; and this one is very strong, and that's my word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and once you have uncovered that part, place it under the top of this lens-shaped instrument; which has the following shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut too deeply, and it has two sharp edges, with the cutting part towards the bone; then strike lightly from below using a small mallet, ensuring you are careful of the cloth that is underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it becomes loose towards the bangle, loosen it slightly with the bone, but do so gently to avoid any harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin and is cut slightly above, with small pieces remaining, you must treat that severity again, and remove scales using a subtle razor of which you should have various quantities in order to apply most conveniently at each location according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If using many large razors first, then more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, you must treat according to their directionality; and this is something not easily repaired by those who have devoted themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary to take a linen cloth as per the quantity of the wound, and oil the yarn with oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another cloth folded twice or thrice, and oil the yarn with wine and olive oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then treat above with a bandage, but not tighten until only touching the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it so for a day or two until the abscess has calmed down, then unbind, and administer remedies such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aloeswood, and similar things; and make these into a powder, apply to the wound, and thereafter administer medicines without causing bitterness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	Ensure the wound is kept clean, do not allow any ointment or bowel to gather there, for when bone joins above the brain's cloth, it swells and hardens, causing great harm; as when a stinging thing touches below, one gets irritated from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore be cautious, if anything unexpected comes to the patient as we have mentioned, it is questionable without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come as a result of the medicine applied, that it has effect, then one must take some honey and three parts rose oil and a piece of cloth, and apply it to the sore.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then proceed with the treatment methods that are appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Sections that are never broken above or below the neck, for they are two bones; and one is cartilaginous and does not break but twists or folds, then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary to insert your little finger or thumb into the neck and align the break with your index finger, and pull gently towards you until the neck regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	e; they c1 pbinn:bon les (P not. Est  far l's; The unblembrud the same; a n’tze ou their la car t.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the neck and cannot bring the thumb to its place, it should be set as level with a small piece of wood.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in two parts, do it similarly and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	or if not on the seventh or twelfth day, when the swelling of the abscesses has subsided, then wrap it with linen bandages at the neck area, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bind another from the other side, if there is a fracture therein; and let the sutures be so large that they fill the pores with blood.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some restorer has said that one must fill the sutures with butter, and turn each day; it does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be filled in making a lamb's wool poultice, and of mill powder; then leave the suture until the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at no time should one put goose feathers on the suture site, and if there is a cloth bandage around it, and hold the breakage, and blow away the bad spirits; as you see fit do so.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess occurs in the nose while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton ball soaked in rose oil or a bit of diaconicon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not appear, then apply a poultice with spelt flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, followed by light gauze, without tying it around the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, remove any foreign matter appropriately, then sew the incision, and treat with warm salves and balms, as well as suitable pastes and ointments for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not have any injury to the eyes, treat with bandages and apply splints until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of fracturing of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured from below and there is no open wound, and the breakage is only slight, because there are bones inside, if you see it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	the c.jir et i est th: Jus are m; Flemra t le ouf s deme with T9 (C. Ise bente la loro qu's and that; y n'llu;
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	When the fracture of the lower jaw is dislocated on both sides, it is necessary to arrange for an equal extension by two parts until they are levelled.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If there are movements of the spine or dislocations, then strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk; then place on the broken jaw a cerot, and place over it a double cloth; then place a large well-made pillow, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, attached securely where you wish, and command the patient to rest and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the figure is changing, and then dislocate it again within three days, and then set it back to how it was changed; then place a poultice over it with finely ground powder or wheat flour after removing the cerot; then cover the poulture lightly, and if the poultice swells, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be so until he is well; many times has been well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	When an abscess occurs, follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no bone fragment remains; delicately remove the surrounding tissue as advised above.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it to fit with your bandage as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have set all the pieces of bone, and it does not stay in place at all, so cover the wound if it is wide, and apply .i. stable splints to hold, for healing, until it becomes sound.
de la forcele	The strengthening of muscles
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fractures break several times before the shoulder, and the breaks are in three ways: one is broken and separated into two parts, and there are fragments, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Et the work is such when there is a fracture without a wound, so you need two assistants, one who treats the dislocated shoulder that feels weakness; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then place the fracture to your arms equally, so that it forms as it should, with no appearance or lopsidedness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round rod of cloth or wool, and it should be thick according to your necessity; stretch and ease the dislocation, hold the rod in their hand, so that they align the fracture equally as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation forward because it comes out on both sides, then let the patient lie down on their stomach, and place under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow; then the assistants lift the shoulder upwards until the bone is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the break of your arm, and if you find any fragments, it is necessary to split them; and pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means, use a tool from one of the incisions that you have made; but place it under the fulcrum, for this instrument will prevent slippage.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it resembles a spoon, not sharp, and is equally wide as necessary for the size of the bone and strength of the tool; and have two edges, as you see, one wider and the other sharper, just as determined by the shape of the wound when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a deep abscess, clean the wound, and if the incision is small or you doubt an abscess is deep, line the wound with strips of cloth according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	When an abscess occurs there, if it fills with pus, then apply a cloth soaked in oil rose-colored and medicinal wine, and place upon it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The splinting of a bone when it feels wounds and is not yet set involves placing an impasture of finely ground powder and egg yolk on the bone, adding light gauze over it, and using a stick beneath if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a large band about the width of a palm, then place a double cloth over gauze and impasture, then take a very thin stick three fingers wide in length and wrap it around that bandlet, ensuring the top part of the bandlet is aligned.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	Place the splint on the fracture, turn the bandage around the neck, and under both the healthy and unhealthy seat, wrapping each part. And when you see that the dislocation holds in place naturally, and it's clear that the splint does not move over the broken bone, then gradually increase the pressure every day; and once the ligaments are healed, release them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	Lay the injured person on their back and place something underneath them when they sleep, a small pillow under the seat to lift the dislocation upward; this will relieve the pressure of the fracture by supporting the shoulder, so you tie the arm to the neck, enscuing no accidental dislocation occurs until 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then restart the splinting, if you see it's needed, and keep it on that way until it is healed; at most in 28 days, but sooner for some patients.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of a broken shoulder blade
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Occasionally the shoulder breaks or comes out of place and cannot be moved without touching; if you arrange it according to the pattern of the break, and the joint in its natural shape, in all ways that you can see; then put powdered molten wax over it with plenty of oil, and light bandages, and cover with a double layer of cloth; then place a wide and delicate rod slightly wider than the shoulder across it, so that no part of the shoulder is left unsupported by these linen strips, which you cut evenly; and then bind everything tightly with a large firm bandage, ensuring the rod does not move from its place, and check the sutures each day; and every time it loosens, tighten again, and make sure the rod is in place if it becomes loose, and rest the patient on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when these numbers are completed, remove the bandage, as it is not bone that sets lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes without breaking through the skin, and heals over, causing swelling and pain, then do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed wound to soothe it.
de la brisure dou pis	From breaking of the shin bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is never broken within the body, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks upon impact. When it is broken inside, it descends downward and causes great pain to the patient, weakness, swelling, heat, and sometimes vomiting blood, with open fractures in the broken bone, feeling very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing is that the patient lies on his back, and a pillow is placed between the shoulders, then press down on the shoulders, and binds the ribcage with both hands, doing so in all possible ways until it is rightly aligned; then place casts and padding over the broken bone gently, either with salt or another light substance, and wrap it in a piece of cloth so that it stays still; then return to the normal position on his back, and loosen gradually as needed, and let out each suture after an hour'amo, and if it becomes loose, re-tighten it; and if it needs to be undone for corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or abscess, do so quickly, remove what is there, and apply suitable treatment methods; then unwrap the casts, and tighten them as needed until healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	One must know that rib fractures occur in the large ones behind and above the spine, and they only bend due to being brittle; and one feels it well at the joints of the back.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the healing is such that you set the fracture rightly, as it should be. Then place a splint and apply bandages if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	lesse de leur ne le t.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And those who say that it should be treated with foods that inflate the stomach in order to push aside the rupture on the other side.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	And we do not make this that becomes cold, as long as it is brought to us, if it has come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if one finds it there, then it must be set right.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that applying cups to the place creates sweating, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cups may attract excessive fluids to the area due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	; that mesme le se mar: a big they est not m (and there
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be borne from the bone that protrudes, causing doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision near the site of the broken rib, and one must place under a tool for warding off syphilis; afterwards, one should cut through the bone, gently extract, then sew together the two edges of the wound if large, and cure with plasters until healed. And when an abscess occurs, apply cloths soaked in oil to it, placing them over the site; treat while keeping the area where the abscess must form above the rib or along its edge as much as possible until healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken rib
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is no time for fractures of the bone in the neck and it does not occur that it bends; also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take care if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that in some cases it is fatal, but if they can move and feel well when they are stretched without pain, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if given care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when a similar case comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, take care if the joints are softened, and there is swelling like hands, and on their back they have windiness and egestion without desire; and when it has been soothed on its belly, it also has egestion without desire. And when it is soothed on its back and wants to rise, it cannot. Know that in some cases it is fatal: do not neglect it in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then the condition is more mild.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	When the cure is that if there is an abscess hot, apply oil of rosemary or olive oil until it is soothed; then place under one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with cloth; then reposition the two edges of the wound, if large, with stitches, then treat with soothing oil until healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as "the shoulder of the cow," put your pouch in your left hand, place it evenly against your right palm for stability, then apply a poultice and bandage if needed; then immobilize, and if there are dislocated bones, treat them, realign, and care for the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For breaking of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there's no need for slight reduction at the top; and they are long, and descend towards the pelvis, and come with pain at the site, swelling, and breaking further.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it as long as it's over the break; and identify what kind of fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only on top, then balance this break to make it naturally shaped.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it slopes towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie down on their stomach until the restoration of that break is ready.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back in place properly, then set it on the plaster cast, and next to a wooden or metal stake, holding the break steady so that it does not move; and fill the space under the ribs until they are level again.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to lie on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears there, do not touch it until the swelling has subsided; then proceed as we have previously instructed; and return to restoring normal function, holding steady as necessary unless there is any complication; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulders are what lie between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, you should reset it according to one of the two methods: wherein one is that you take a plain iron rod as thick as this.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And fasten two pins on each side, and place the patient under one of them; then pour some liquid onto the broken bone over the rod until it reaches the joint, and have a curved piece of wood in midway, then rest it against any object or let the servants hold it down; then put splints on either side of the break equally, as if clasped together, until the fracture is properly set.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	Sze; the cest the ou d s the bente but  by this in the resulting the ca; they arentin contcme thestronce mil que (alsot; and so t1 s strait se t
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the extraction is more severe, hold a ligament below the break and on both sides of it, then extend each member to its part. And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder blade, it must be set with one ligature under the collarbone, and another towards the back from the break; likewise, if the fracture is towards the arm bone, there should be a lightly placed ligament without strain until the break is equal on both sides and above the level, then align the break properly, and secure it with a ligature, unless an abscess occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess occurs, do not secure it until six days have passed and apply a moistened cloth with oil rose to soothe the abscess; then set the ligature, ensuring that you place an immobilizing splint over the break, align the arm above the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast. Wrap the bandage and secure it at the shoulder joint and the arm, allowing the arm to rest properly unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not aligned.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt if the bone is not moving, use a more robust and wider than the other straps, and have between each strap two inches long, and be so wide that it passes over the break, then tighten the wrappings as I said at beginning on the chapter of this joint.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you see the seat of the fractures and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour when you return the broken limb, and you doubt if the abscess is hot, let it lie bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each for three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs at that place where sores cannot come due to excessive stretching. If necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	If no such incidents occur, do not reset the dislocation until after three or more days, and let the patient sleep on their back with hands over their stomach; then place an evenly made pillow of linen under the shoulder, and observe each hour during the day and night to ensure that there is no movement in the broken limb or softening of the bandages. If necessary by the virtue of medicine, give them the flesh as we have previously mentioned, so that the meat is at its most subtle; and when they begin to regain strength, let it be plentamoind. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days altogether; then you should deslocate and administer baths and ointment medicines to direct healing. If the tightening is ugly and swollen, delay resetting for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	For a fractured arm, wrap the limb with an evenly made pillow of linen under it; then observe each hour during the day and night to ensure proper healing without excessive movement or swelling. If necessary by medicinal means, give them nourishing food as we have previously mentioned, so that their strength is replenished gradually.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one is small and supports the elbow; the other is large, and is located below it towards the smaller joint; sometimes only the large foscile is broken, or the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bone is broken, the repair and healing are easy, and when the large one is broken, the treatment becomes more difficult than if both were broken together. If only the small bone is fractured, it should be slightly extended to realign quickly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large bone that needs to be pulled apart more firmly; and extended on a support, raising the elbow higher than the others, while keeping the small joints lower than the others, and crossing the limbs across each other in the same place, with one support placed higher before them so the patient does not suffer any strain. Then extend the minor supports of the arm to the part below the hand or at a ligament, placing another minor support on the opposite side above it. And then set the joints evenly according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each piece back to its original position, and if any are out of order that touch the bone, and cannot be restored to their original position, then make a cut around it as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a break with a wound, I have discussed this individually with the surgeon; take that treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if there is an opening with multiple abscesses, take this particular treatment I have discussed; apply that remedy. Then make a poultice of clay oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; place the poultice carefully over each abscess until they are calmed down. Afterward, remove the poultice, and sprinkle the powdered medicine generously, then insert the splints as before, ensuring that the one for the fracture is more secure and slightly wider than the others; be aware it must have 2 or 3 splints in various configurations: whether the fracture is on one bone or two, ensure there are more stitches holding it, compared to elsewhere, and each day do not adjust them as much as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; and keep the bandages that cover the fracture soft and moist, neither too tough nor rough; use thread made from linen, not too thick or thin, as we have said. And after some days, tend to the limb and ligament again.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	If any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon a member, you must wash the limb with warm water until the itch is soothed; and allow the limb not to rest too tightly. Then resume the binding, and if the bandages are softened and the bone freed, and other similar things, then proceed accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a bit and leave so for some days until the swelling subsides, then resume the binding.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, let him be bound until xx days or so; then place his hands around his neck, and make sure the collars are equal, and guard against movement and displacement, and he sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or xxxv., and by chance in xx days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of a fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It is said that on the back of the hand and in the knuckles are few fractures, but many times they are sprained.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or sprained, it is necessary for the patient to cross his fingers, and sit them straight ahead evenly; then he places his hand on an extended table, and extends the broken bones, arranging them equally as they should be well joined; and applies a plaster and gauze, if abscesses are present, otherwise he puts a splint according to the quantity of it needed; and it is wrapped in .i. cloth made of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	c.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is too far gone, it is necessary to place a pillow above and another below on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then wrap it entirely around with a bandage, keeping the joints in between close.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to one of us at any joints, whether it is a sprain, position them equally as needed; and strain with pressure, and if you see fit, place a small straight pillow to lift the fracture without movement; and if the fracture is at other joints, like in the index or one of the others, align them evenly, and bind with healthy joints that are adjacent; or tie all together using one bandage, allowing for some mobility, or place a pillow underneath as needed; and be cautious during healing and abscess treatment, and also remove any swelling that occurs, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	For a broken thigh (femur fracture).
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and as it heals, one can see when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration involves using a leech above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each healer extends their hand equally to their side; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one leech should extend their hand towards the fingers and the other below the fracture. Similarly, if it's close to the groin, then the leeches should place their hands by the groin, extending upwards; next put a splint on the bone aligned with both hands until it restores its natural shape, then apply linen bandages and ointments without any suppuration.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess hot, let it be soothed then return to your work and treatment; the lymph gland is made in part manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the break i.e., a bandage made of two or three layers doubled; and control excesses, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the shin, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the kneecap, letting the head of the string go over it; then turn around the leg and thigh with the bandage, then place an olive at the break site, and put one on the bone of the leg; then fill the gap between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to apply even tension, then begin to tie three turns or four above the break; as you move further from the break, apply less tension; then go back to the two ends of the thread that you tied around the leg and thigh, and insert three olives (suspended) above them, then come back over the knee until you reach below it; if the bandage is not moved from its place, leave it as such, then make sure nothing protrudes or inflames.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if this happens, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that poke out, then one can easily remove them; and if they cannot be removed, it is necessary to cut the flesh, and pull through forcefully; and treat it as we have said, until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	At no time is the tail broken as when one inserts pins in it, like with shoulders and arms; however, in such restoration made, it does not always calm the patient's ailments.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the tail is restored in one or two days, more or less, depending on the different temperaments of individuals.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the pathway through the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	*  t in the small. But it; they.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one places equally what is crooked in its joints so that they can be moved as desired; then place the splint and if needed, put a round pole for support, and hold it as it should be, then attend to all the preparations we have mentioned for other breaks, abscesses, etc., applying appropriate treatment for each condition until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	For the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	There are two bones in the leg, one is called "talus" and the other is called "fibula"; all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for that reason the restoration is done just like it would be for an arm.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is turned from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if a delicate bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling; then straighten the limb, make it equal, and tie the fractures equally; however, you must ensure that the breakage looks unpleasant, and there are many pieces, so that the extension be lesser and lighter; adjust accordingly with your knowledge.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your treatment, take two strips of wood covered in linen on one side and the other that are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap them both around, binding it firmly so that the leg may not turn left or right, which is good; and no one administers a bandage along the length of the leg made of wood, instead they position the leg for protection against movement, properly treating the break where there is injury; and move each day the leg to see if there is swelling or any other accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	In the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a bone in the foot breaks and occasionally it shifts slightly without causing any severe displacement or issues.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it occurs with the broken bone of the foot, and you see these bones rising towards each other, place such weakened pieces of wood on the ground, as if they were to go there; now put your own foot under theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and stuffing underneath, and place a small tablecloth with two flat edges over the belly of the broken foot, then strain it back into position, and once wrapped in bandages around, and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, release the ligaments, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any broken bones, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place an iron bar on each side according to the length of the bone, and make it a bit wider, then place the small tablecloth that I mentioned under the belly of the foot, and straighten it back into position; and if there are two or three, or more broken bones, put a bar on each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strain the tablecloth under the belly of the foot, so that they should be well aligned.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said for other breaks, as we have said; and treat each accident as it should be done.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For a fracture of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman is broken and needs to be set in place, first make her lie down with her back facing upward, then support her from behind; then fill her vagina with cotton wool as much as one egg-size, and have her stand up slightly while lifting her hips little by little until the cotton reaches the entrance of the vagina, then insert a stick; if she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once done, replace it; do this for six days or more: the fracture will be restored. If desired, take a sheep bladder, tie a flannel cloth at its opening, and fill the bladero with water until full. Blow into the flannel to deflate the bladder so that all air is released inside; her vagina will return to normal. Then fill it with cotton wool again and leave it for several days until healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the forefinger is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said with the thigh bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their skill and effort, and listen to my book. For fractures indicate various conditions on the right path to restoration: therefore pay attention.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the penis; then wrap with linen around, and leave for three days or as many nights, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fractures accompanied by wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bones of the hip or shoulder, that they be set right now, so that the methods we have mentioned bear witness to their healing.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound but there are remains of glass powder, unless you have something else, then begin again to reset the fracture in that same hour or day, unless an abscess arises.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess arises, leave the resetting until a new moon, as long as the abscess is soothed, and do not approach it on the following day or the fourth part of that time, for otherwise you would bring about a bad incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is broken and appears beneath the skin exposed, it must be gently aligned by hand with slight pressure to extend it.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear suitable to be put in place by hand, then use this instrument made of iron with six or eight prongs and its width according to the size of the wound; thus it is necessary for the surgeon to grasp three or four (prongs), depending on how many are needed for each fracture treatment; let them be smooth and slightly thickened so they do not bend under pressure on the limb at your work, with one end pointed forward, and thicker in front of it:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And they are called 'palainches', so that the shoulders must be placed underneath the visible bone; and it should be level with each other at all times as it moves back to its place. And if the fracture is subtle, and the protruding part of the bone cannot be properly grasped by the instrument, then you shall cut off the end of the bebone, so that the instrument has a chance to grip it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with the cap of an appropriate instrument, either cutting or sawing, to your ability; then remove what is lodged in the hardened bone and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure to put a linen soaked in black sticky vinegar properly on it; do not apply oil or any other substance over the wound, as this could cause decay and contamination. Then provide dressings when you have restored the binge, leave the wound exposed, cover the entire area around the wound according to its size, and take good care that the wound is not strained with movement; many times, foolish medics have done these things, leading to death or corruption at least once. The tightening should be gentler and more soothing than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is severe or large and you doubt that there may be an accidental occurrence of it, as we have said before; if you find pain in the area, do not apply dressings but instead, wrap hard cloths around it. But when you see after a day or two that the wound has healed to some extent, take off what you put on and apply sanative ointment for sore wounds as tetrafarmacist's ointment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is well-settled and healthy again.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be fitted with an appliance so that the bow can bend slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after three days it still cannot heal and remains loose like this because there are small bone fragments causing the pain, then you must cauterize the wound with a tent (or cover) and remove all those superfluous bones that cause the suffering.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If a fistula occurs at the site, or another type of corruption, it must be treated as described in this chapter before. And when bones are broken and exposed on the limb, like the pelvis or shoulder, for similar large body parts, do not suture them, because many times death results, but leave them until they heal; perhaps it will close by itself after 12 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruises that come about the hernia
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come upon this after the healing of the hernia, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant sight is seen in the limb's appearance; and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then beware if the joint is stiff: if you administer medicinal substances like aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, and resin, or any similar things, whether you choose one of these ingredients or all together, and mix them with astringent wine, or an abundance of honey or oil; then place it in a gauze pouch, tightly bind it without untying during the day; then dislocate it again, and start over with another until the inflammation is gone; or strain on a well-formed piece of wood; because the property of the wood is that it dispels swelling above the limbs; and if the inflammamo
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after childbirth
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fiches are too many and weakly as it is proument: or li brisure of the eaument; for in such a lays; ne poite laisse; et desuirnent trop quarrerement multitudes et s, et ce il est de pierre.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the patient eat, and keep the body supple, until the blood multiplies within them; and administer baths, and give joy and laughter; then apply poultices to the limb so that the poultice draws significant nourishment to it, and often raise it with warm water, until the swelling recedes from the limb; then let it return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	And if the member remains twisted after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	And if the member remains twisted after healing, and the bones are broken apart, and the shape of the limb is unattractive: however, do not believe the foolish who say that you must break off the entire limb anew, as many a madman has done on our land; such procedures are blameworthein, and they bring great harm, and sometimes death. Nevertheless, if the knots and twists are fresh, it is necessary to raise them with warm water, or mollifying herbs that have been cooked, like milk thistle leaves, roots, and meal of millet, and such things; and you make a .i. soothing poultice, as good as diaquilon, and take the musk of milk thistle, and mix it with linseed oil or sesame seed oil fat, and apply the poultice; or take figs' fatnesses, and grind them with flaxseed flour, and similar medicines that soothe stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	At no time is there an infected bone from rubbing continuously and long with wet hands. And let the movement of each limb be amended every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted and hardened curvature is like stone, it also needs to be pried with iron, up to the bone; using a delicate incision tool gently; then apply poultice and study in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocamen
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	t; that a. <l; and (pr; if the bon nd ; bys c; they has not s; after the ou; with the d. The car; but the la fleteze them bolecks, or other; the qut;
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs, if it is necessary now bring back gently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because if delayed, and the head swells, and perhaps when reset it is difficult to place back in position; therefore one must not move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times this brings on inflammeback and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Also, when this happens, then make the patient lie still, until the swelling of the abscess has subsided; then apply warm water and oil to the limb, then gently move it back in place, and care for each member as needed when healing comes into its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	f:
des mandibules	Of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated outward, and the dislocation can occur in two ways: either they are slightly misaligned from their place and softened a bit; or they are completely dislodged, hanging toward the worse side, causing saliva to spill from the mouth which it cannot contain, preventing closure of the mouth and swallowing of the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	Dislocation: ous les jawbone are they come uncuit enclosed properly to be removed from their place, et can heal them do not open up it so that out the saluties of mouth ou is too loosy and dislocated or reposition li close enough bone at lade with the teeth aligned: either as for it done and are they dose the estriven, you to remain properly in position. Dislocation until from place; they are not dislocations can be their own has come outrainsurgeon.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	If it is complete and severe, one must reset it promptly, without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a manner that the minister should wash the patient's head, and place wool pads from one of his hands on the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is in two parts; while the other hand remains open to apply pressure equally. Then command the patient to soften their jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And on it so, with warm water, et pours.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if resetting is difficult, especially when both jaws are together, soak in warm water and oil, until they can be gently moved; do not push too hard while resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are moved equally for the patient's comfort, and their jaw feels somewhat relieved, then place a cloth soaked in a mixture of oil-based rosewater and wax on it, and gently tie with soft linen threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head resting between two pillows, so that he does not move left or right, nor should he exert himself to eat much, but only eat light foods until the pain is gone and the jaws have been washed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Then gently move what it wants to, and do not work hard in opening the mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is properly set and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set back to their proper position within an hour and are not restored to their original places, fevers and usual sweats may occur, along with possible intestinal issues or unadulterated vomiting by chance.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then declare that it is a calamity; and many times those who experience it die within seven days.
de la forcelle	Of forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot dislocate the ribs within and below, nor is it ever dislocated without feeling.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms; then firmly press the level with your palm, and it will return; then place upon the plaster and the bandage, and secure.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	the same.  ;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And so similarly, return the head of the spine when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder dislocates in three ways: one where it comes out from under the collarbone, and another from below. And sometimes it dislocates upwards, but this is rare.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	; ch s so that you ben que lesse se: the he will des muche pe’s c p and it is not cef; it may they do not modern with such as f. That line : (et so e have, I want lo C.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to certain men from a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary for you to examine it thoroughly until certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocation when tilted towards the elbow, and makes a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their distinctive variety.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	If it is dislocated upward as well, it is not hidden, for you can plainly feel it upon touching.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not only to reset when it's new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner of the dislocated arm, then lift it upwardly the hand and put in its upper side as a ligni les poins duos; et le mete la mains de l’est en haut, li maugrontes pois mete poinz los.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	If it does not return as we have described after some days, the patient should be bathed in warm water; and treat with soothing and softening agents like an infusion of altheae, fennel, and millet seeds in water, and then treated.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then place a sling over the patient's back, and put an equal length of linen under their shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then position the footrest with the heel of the affected leg on it, and gently lift the head of the dislocated shoulder. Treat the afflicted side.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And other treatments should be applied to the head of the affected side so that it does not move downwards. The shoulder will return promptly now if you see the dislocation according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient; and he stands towards him, and places his shoulder below the one with the dislocation, and lifts the affected side upward so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other ministers hold the patient's hand downward toward the abdomen. And if the dislocated side is too light, bind it with something heavy, and the dislocation now returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the resetting can be done in another way: and it is that you insert a long stick into the ground so that its head is as wide as a small stone, and neither too large nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	First have the patient lie down and remove their clothes below, ensuring they are well-covered above, and let the injured person be lying longwise; then extend his hand to the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not want to return for all the reasons we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take one bundle of two arm's lengths and four hands' breadth, which has its head rebound to enter in front below the seat, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then cover the long trunk with cloth to prevent it from touching the sick person, then place the sick person below the seat and position the arm alongside the long trunk; extend the arms above the trunk, and fix the shoulder on top of the trunk, placing the hand at the head end of the arm, then insert the arm under a rib of one row widthwise, and extend the hands downwards, allowing the body to hang on the other side: the joints will return immediately.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in any manner whatsoever, it must be that you place over the joint a spindle of wool equal, then apply the plaster prepared with powder from milling, with incense and oven hawk's egg, on all the shoulder and around it; then strain off the plaster quickly, turn the sling onto the plaster, and wrap the hand at its neck, so that the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be that you eat little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; if it becomes firm and not softened, then it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strongly displaced due to moisture or another reason, it must be that you apply three burns with fire cauterization as shown before in this chapter of fire cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you perform all of this and it remains dislocated for over seven days, and the joint does not hold or lift the arm forward, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is pinched or stretched out or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be properly aligned in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the left side and the muscles, or behind, is caused by impact, elongation of hands, and other ligaments; treat until it is healed properly.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes tremors in the limb, and later twinges of movement, the patient suffers many times until those tremors subside, returning to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder joint dislocation from a fall
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the shoulder joint dislocation occurs at points and returns to those points; when it has dislocated from all parts, especially in front and behind, the dislocation cannot be properly reset as one can clearly see and feel it, and it dislocates according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you reset the dislocated shoulder with its counterpart, if it is evident to you. Because the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm nor reach its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	. I ben ta the:
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: when it can be returned in such a way, extend its hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the fingers wrapped around according to the course of the cord, behind and above, joining the joint with its bones together or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, when it doubles its hand to its own hand and wraps the cord's root of the palm which has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, provide strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and bind each with a cord, so that it cannot move at the extension; then turn the arm in both directions until you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the hair reaches the joint of the joint with its hand, if anointed with any oil to soften the joint, then reset the joint properly until it is restored.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, if applied with dry paste and egg white, then strain properly, and hang the arm on a pillow towards the patient's malady, and leave for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, start again with the dry paste and bindings, and let them be for some days until they are firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	If it feels instability after the reset of the joint, and it moves again, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is relieved; or place a greased sheep's fat pad over the joint, leave for one day and night, then bandage, and let them take their bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	When it sweats, rub the joint well and then replace the fat pad, then allow them to take their bath; do this two or three times until healed; if you see swelling, put warm moist straw mixed with butter on it, and strain it. It will return to its normal position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs and its return is easy compared to other joints as well; it must be promptly returned to its place at the same time it is dislocated, whether the flesh is swollen or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the readmissions require placing the affected hand on a table, extending its fingers, and aligning it evenly so that you place your palm at the appearance of the joint, pushing until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Nevertheless, you must ensure it is properly placed; then position the back of your hand on a table while extending and returning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a tabletop, and let the healer put their hand under the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, use the soothing strains of balm and allow it to rest until you begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to place it back in its original position after several days, the dislocated joint remains twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and the patient is unable to grasp anything when their hand is soiled, and cannot exert any force at all: thus understand that the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other remedy but to grasp with fire near the case, and perhaps it serves no other purpose.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, then place it on the splint as we have said, then strain and leave for 5 days, then release and keep thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no weakness, then apply warm water lather, and rub until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never are dislocated at each hand portion, never to the back of the palm or belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then they are set and the dislocation is held by your fists until it returns, then support the head of the thumb, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	After leaving it for two days and then setting it level on the third day; and each night tie it as we have said, remove the bandage during the day, and move it occasionally, then reapply the dressing at night; do this often until it becomes straight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it becomes normal again; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dilation of the spinal column of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several occurrences of it, there is no remedy, as death soon follows for the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations occur suddenly without willingness and cannot be held in, causing many times a limb to become weakened or both thighs or one arm or another.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And the eau l’or, and are feignie la signes it is often come they occur with beaux cu the maintes le ne, ties: et li. 1 in both lesse que est maintenant times ou sces, et soi les a se, plus; si mues bours that de fois, par à l’otre enlignes maintes le ointons qui doit au peau.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is to restore it so that if the discoloration has come from childhood, there should be no healing or cure in its entirety.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the old methods of treatment through great speeches say there is no benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and made ointments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	t:
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also those that arise directly between two ribs, which cannot be treated unless the one specifically located at the back, as I have said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and there is that the patient's face should be extended at one place equally, and have strain away from them so they do not bend;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert a stick in the ground at the top and another at the feet, and tie a band around the joints of the patient's limbs, and at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	s but nonece;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And are securely closed as we have said, with the cushion placed on the spine flatly, until they heal.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not heal from this treatment, take a stick three arm's length long and chevroned at one end, place the patient on the side with the chevron facing upwards, then position the middle of the stick along the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And position the healer's feet under the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see this, make it into a wheel that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you insert two torches at the top of the patient's large arm on one side and towards the other two sides, with between each torch, above and below, a handspan width long.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and each torch should have a rod attached to it, which can be turned, and the torches must be firmly set in place so that they do not move; and between each pair of torches there should be another turning torch on which the rods turn, with two small torches, one handspan long, for adjusting the rod.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then connect the rods among the ligatures at the torch towards the top, and the other rod towards the sides to the other torch; each assistant turns their respective torch along the entire length of the rod, and the master places the spine equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	When they are even again, place a dry draugeret with plenty of wool, then the plugs, and then an ointment from a tablet three ounces long, to fill in the void left by the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	If at the end of their recovery nothing comes from it, administer softening and soothing medications with the ointment we have mentioned earlier; and do not ever give them a piece of lead.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And never does it appear in the back of the spine, and do not think that this is dislocation; and it's the bone that breaks, so you should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip joint dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that dislocations of the hip and shoulder joints only occur as such, not like other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, and slightly forward or backward. And less so to either side.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of inward dislocation is such that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it appears longer, and has more deformed joints than the sound one, and the injured cannot double its knee due to fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	by what yout; The t; (s: ça tre-fle bout i m the line :
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one to whom it comes upon, is such that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one to whom it occurs in front is such that they walk well on their leg according to completion; however, do not double the knee with pain, and if you want them to stand up, first ensure they can bend it, and hold urine retention, and swelling of the groin, and as they move forward, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	seg; c'sud leslso: 1 but they way the sole (et ce bon tous fjoss; e tella; that n’m (throchemde.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resets for this type of dislocation are that you should check if the dislocation is recent and it stays according to its nature, without any care; and it does not require haste or assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation: if you hurry to reset the joint, push it inside and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return on its own without needing further care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return this way, it is necessary to seek a strong healer and support the leg strongly with two hands or with a bandage on the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And other ministers extend their hand over the teal in such a way that they place their hands below its scales, then gently tighten a ligature around its thigh; and others tie the head with the ligature.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend it lengthwise and widthwise all at once, so that the patient may stand upright for a moment and hang suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four kinds; and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, one must provide care similar to it. When the dislocation is in the teeth, ensure that you support the patient on their side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh, and the part that has come out from under the groin, then extend the ligature upwards towards the buttock, and towards the forepart.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then attach other members of its arms and envelop the larger part of the patient's thigh that has come out, extending it fully forward: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, you must tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong sash underneaturally low (around 20% to 35%, compared to about 45% for non-Hispanic whites), and their access to employment opportunities is also lower.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang from the head of a log and have two arms extended; then instruct one minister to embrace the neck at the waist, and have another set of ministers hanging with the patient who also embraces the waist, as now the joint quickly returns.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is severe, if it falls on the patient, as we have said in those with gilbosis, and strains a band above the affected leg properly, and at the knee likewise.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two cauterizations, one at the head and one on the feet, then insert a cauterization between the buttocks within the patient's form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And it is to apply wet bandages around it so the patient does not move, then extend each limb toward him, and the physician places the dislocation evenly in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, put on a board as we have said in the fracture treatment, and lay the patient with the injured side up.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; then place the physician's thumb above the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is below, it does not mean to extend the patient's arm or lift off the ground, but you must let them rest as if the elbow had been dislocated below, as we have said in lying on both elbebones;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on its face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and one must put pressure above the joint onto the board.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be placed when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then put the buttocks together, and place the bellows, and tighten with a bandage so that the elbow does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	After resting for 3 or 4 days, then reset it and apply the plaster; if you see they are even, strain them as before, and leave them for 3 days; then reset it, and let it move gently until the member is supported.
de la dislocation dou genoil	For the dislocation of the knee joint.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: internally and downwards, and behind it; not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not return to his hip, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all things is such that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, placing your back to his face, and putting your foot under his.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his thigh into your hands, and draw it in between your thumbs, then fold the two ribs of the thigh thoroughly; and other helpers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he feels his leg at his hip lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And place the plaster over it, and raise the leg to the hip, and tie them together firmly for iii or iv days, then release; and do not allow the patient to move until the limb is comfortably set.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb cannot be straightened well, treat it as we have described in the care of the thigh, until it is made whole again.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully submerged, nor ever fully drained, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs if it is that the ankle is swollen, and reaches out before the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And lie down with hands should be spread gently when he is swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	When it is dislocated completely, one must make the patient sit upright and support them with a board outside the leg, above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then raise their foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice to the left hand, then extend it upwards, and gently place the foot back on top of their leg.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this twice as we have said, pulling and stretching the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	If it cannot return like this, lay the patient on their back with earth beneath them, and firmly insert a stake between their thighs, wrap cloth around so they do not move.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then dye the minister's thigh and have another minister extend their feet or a strap over the neck of the foot to tie it securely.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and the stakes should be placed between the patient's thighs to hold them steady when extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then set the bone back into its place in the dislocated joint, and other treatments include soaking the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it reaches this point, apply the poultice and bandages above, strain tightly, and tie the cloth to the leg, protecting the nerves behind the ankle so that the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, re-strain them; then release after one day or at most four days, and prevent the patient from walking for twenty days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	If it goes beyond this limit, it is not reassuring that it does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	;
des dois	Of dislocations
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When joints are dislocated, if they require significant extension without much effort, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any one of your back or feet, you must make the patient sit on a plain level or table standing straight, and place their foot beneath these joints. Then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its position.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	t:t it the I themd.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees it to be restored, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not overconfident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	At the beginning of soothing matters treat abscesses quickly, and let the patient be in God's hand, if you do not see hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place immediately, so that the abscess may heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is back in place, apply soothing measures for abscesses quickly and treat the wound as necessary with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	rophon to marl’s, so pleviet t und the ou ougt;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And be cautious not to enter into fear, as I have said, for this will move according to your Maker, and for the health of your arms and body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Describe the anatomy
