O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its explanation and concluded by its expositions and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this chapter, which is part of the work on hands, namely 'Surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and carried out everywhere, it has been neglected except for a few details from ancient books that describe what the hands have done.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus arises error and folly, and understanding is closed off, and wisdom has departed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I wish to revive this treatise with the arrangement of its chapters according to exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and also come together the forms of cauldrons for cautery, and other tools of the craft with the addition of preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters at hand in our times, the art of medicine has been abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	It is necessary for those who undertake this to ascend in the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, understanding the judgment of bones, their shapes and connections and separations, having knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and number of veins, and their movement and active and resting states.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And so Hippocrates says that the unaided hand is very little, and with effort it is even less; similarly in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not attentive to what has been said before, be careful that they do not err and kill people; as I have often witnessed with some who undertake this science and abandon themselves without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	When I saw a mad knight who cut an abscess of scrofulous swellings or neck of a woman, and cut the vessels at its base; so much blood flowed out that the woman bled to death in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another knight who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a part of the bladder, and within three days, the man died from it.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called upon to treat it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he was to be cut open, he would surely die from it.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	This physician took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was also an injury; and the ignorant doctor reset the fracture on top of the wound at the proper location by firmly securing it, without leaving any gap, and left it in this state for some time; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated again. It remained thus until the leg was completely healed, along with the foot, and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come to him, and hurried to dislocate the leg; and when it was dislocated so gently, he felt at peace and experienced no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the infection was already confirmed within the member and could not be healed; and the condition did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And behold I see another physician who fells an encrusted abscess, which then inflames due to the spite of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humors, does not need to be touched with iron unless in part its location allows for the removal of what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And thus, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place within this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to protect yourself so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your weapons with caution, and embark on the healing of the sickly both gently and firmly, using the best method so by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised; and let go of hopeful illnesses that bring great health concerns, and remove your doubts about these weapons, and have faith within yourself so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien in some of his warnings says: "Do not take on poorly diseased illnesses that you be called foolish."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire and medicinal cauterization wounds, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; including descriptions of swellings, ferrules for cauterization, and all necessary items in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The first of the cauterization and items from wounds are de laires de l’artemonginsions, and tos forms de ase.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head to the elbows, and the shapes of stretching.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So we shall remember our work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of help and the harm of each composition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtle science and its secret responses; and on this topic, many wise ones speak and agree with it; but their words suffice little to me because I return in length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps in all constitutions where there is matter; for two kinds of constitutions exist - those with hot moisture and those with dry moisture.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the constitution with both hot and dry moisture, some say that fire cautery is of great help, while others argue otherwise - that it only benefits diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to treat heat-related diseases by adding more heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise argue that fire cautery provides great help for both hot and dry diseases affecting human bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you examine the body of the person and their moisture with the fiery temperament, you find the body to be cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	t e times the m and heum: ESTTrafordnez par la oulez de.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the healers gathered and agreed on the treatment.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of the cure, and even greater beneficence than burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	thed; Tap. ould that lesquilibtud: O.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Ardent medicines come from one body part to another by joining them together and bring severe illnesses for healing to the affected member; and sometimes it kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The veins due to their high position and goodness of their substance do not act in this way unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have discovered through experimentation and the extensive service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it lies in accordance with the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the lengthiness of my words, because I do not wish to take from you the secret knowledge on which or how this work operates, and the quality of its function, as explained by the philosopher when demonstrating; consider it well in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, when to perform the cauteries and praying lines.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable in all cases, because the damage occurring can be avoided by using cautery; especially when a necessary and urgent pain cannot wait for greater harm to come upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the mad doctors; because a disease cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are only medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humors causing pain, and it works faster than other medicines due to its potency and power of its action.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And sometimes the illness comes due to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; they are combined in him excesses from the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain relief, and other matters, so that no more pain returns; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last of medicine, and that's true; but they don't believe that cauterizations have value after medicine, their understanding is false, because when we administer treatment methods for any disease and they are ineffective, then we apply our cauterization, and it has value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then indeed cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that surgical instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not consider bronze as it pertains to the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the eye of a cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true as I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; surgical instruments of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed when you heat a gold instrument, it is not due to the color of gold, and it cools down quickly; if overheated, it requires fire; thus there are sufficient obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the iron cautery as we have found suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil for anointing and healing purposes.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are for moisture and cold on the brain; there are two that are done because of an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors descending from the head into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, as well as all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, stroke, and similar afflictions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	sirlement.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with a cross between your hands, and place his hands on either side of the base; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever you see come his nerves, let it bleed first and then cool off the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the location marked with ink, and gently pull and twist your hand little by little; then lift your hand slightly, and return to the spot where you see a small bone protruding; if you do not see this, continue cauterizing until you see the bone as I have told you; afterward take some honey, place it in soft cotton inside, and put it on the location, leaving it there for three days; then apply fine linen soaked in butter; leave it until the scab is dry; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they say among the elders that when the wound is more open, it purifies better; and for this reason help yourself with salves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these say that one must thoroughly cauterize the part where bone is burnt and then repair what has been burnt off from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must cauterize sufficiently above, and push so hard as to bow the bone as wide as the wreath women put in their hairs so that humors flow out; and one should keep the open wound for a long time, after which it should be cleaned and bandaged.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases; except for certain people who have reason to fear. However, it seems to me that I should leave them alone, because the head becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs; and likewise when the head of a sick person is naturally weak, and the first sign of cauterization is more healing and effective for me, so I work accordingly with this method which brings together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From ankle pain to severe headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When pain in all parts of the head comes chronically and lasts long, one must use years and pills called "cochie," as well as enemas, oils, and plasters; but if they undergo cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's headache is of a strong nature and not too cold; then you should apply cautery below the previously mentioned cautery, as we have described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	; t. The 1 and so (thuser as far theirs.
dou cautere dou chief	Of fire cautery for the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends to its extremity, and the shoulder is purified by medicinal substances, and other treatments as I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, but they prove useless: then one makes fire cautery according to two ways, that is to say with quinces and with iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The quinces cautery is such that you take a piece of alchemy mercury and scrape off and cover two points with the same substance, then make the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the alchemy mercure from under the skin; and when it has been replaced properly and securely and left thus for 12 hours; and then loosen and cut along the alchemy mercury, leaving the wound like this for two or three days; then place cotton soaked in butter until pus is formed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the healing ointment is applied until it is cleaned; and if you see, take some of the medicinal substances I have written or mentioned in treating with burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is made as follows. Heat the fire cauterizer of which this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole or has .i. small protrusion and resembles an eye; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron slightly until half of the expected color turns charred; lift your hand so that the tissue does not burn further behind, and let an abundance of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton in the ear for three days, and then putting moistened cotton with butter, afterwards treating the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellus', at all points, be sure not to burn the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	Migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the migraine as we have previously described in sections of diseases, and it does not work, and see that neither medicine nor iron is effective for the cautery as before mentioned, then it must be heated with the 'cultellus' type cautery until it is white; and thusly on the tender part of the ear, draw a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and let blood flow all the way to the bone; beware lest the lower jaw moves when eating, and nerves have no regard for it but only towards the migraine until spasms come upon the patient; and be wary of bleeding from the artery once cauterized if there is great fear or equal distress to those who are not aware and untried. But I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery has been cauterized, and I will show you where it opens at that place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness and the patient is suffering greatly, caulk within the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; if you see so, administer the cautery we have mentioned or in the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has .ij. knives; this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of ear pain due to cold air
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from cold air and one has tried solvent medicines and other treatments we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then apply this caustic called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing everywhere around the ear, where either both sides hold pain and you remove the lump near the root of the ear once it has been touched; keep six points around each ear; then treat the area until it is clean.
de la torture de la bouche	For oral torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a cautery for similar ones caused by pus and snake venom.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture that causes swelling from venom and cleansing purges, gargles, and such remedies are ineffective, then you should apply three cauterizations to the patient: one at the root of the ear, another a little forward on the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, directing it towards the top of the ear just below the tip, and another along the length of the temple as long as a piece; leave the cautery until half the skin is burnt off, this being the effect of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the kind of scraping we have described before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after treating them as I have previously mentioned, until they are healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is present and you treat it as we have said, and if it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each of the two temple bumps, and one in the center of the head, and one at the location that we call "vessels" as we have previously mentioned, and another near the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of languor
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large years and purgative pillow-moulds to cleanse the brain; afterwards shave the head of the sick person entirely, and place upon their occipital bone an astrolabe made of sinapis (black mustard), as prescribed in treatises on plasters. And this is how you perform the cautery: do so as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it proves to be so, well done; and if not, then do as follows: make three cauteries below the head extending down to the neck, with two fingers' width between each one, and treat them all similarly, and if you see that they are adhering together, create a fourth cautery in the middle. And if it is necessary, perform two more above the ears, and treat until it becomes well, as I have previously mentioned; this last cautery will be called an 'olive press', as I have before said.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold in the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be made smooth of years and what we have previously mentioned; after resetting the head for the patient, then perform caustication in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations above the spine of the back; leave it until as much skin has grown, then raise your hand; after treating so that it becomes healthy, and let be the caustication which we have called "olivare" previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Surgical methods should not be used on the patient unless they are phlegmatic; first, one must purify the brain with leeches and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical affliction.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, give them gargles and mastication to purify the brain often with good meats; afterward they will have their heads shaved, and .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessels, and above each horn; and if patients are very afflicted and suffering, give them cauterization as I have described to those with paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine of the back and neck, and it shall be an olive cautery according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, give them a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted dampness and large phlegm, then the fire cautery of parts as we have told should be applied to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses leading to melancholy, and the body is moistly sick, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be cleansed, according to its state in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the sick person is bandaged; after applying a well-made linen bandage, like a circle, placed on top of the head; and the patient's hair crossed evenly, and held firm from all sides; then present the ointment, and anoint with old sheep butter; and heat it gently over fire so that one can endure to pour the oil into it; after emptying the circle from inside the head, let it cool; and do this once a week to someone sickly with good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see that the patient has been burned in various places by the caustic, this method of caustication moistens the brain equally; then place cotton wool soaked in butter and lamb fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	From the heat of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the heat comes first to the eyes as I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something that clarifies the mind, and protects from all dampness, and they may sweat or take baths multiple times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to raise his head, and make a fire cautery in the head, and two small cauterizations over the temples where the nerves of the temple are together, or if it is one; wrap all vessels from the blood causticization and arteries that are below the crown, and let the caustic be long according to the width of the temple; watch for bleeding out of control, and if too much blood flows, stop with a dressing as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to dress it as you would; never do causticization or binding below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	In the body's tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, watery superfluities, then apply the caustic as I have said at the beginning of this chapter: i. a caustic on the head, ii. caustics above the two temples, and ii. caustics or haiterel under the two bones; and if more is needed, cauterize gently over the eyebrow with each small caustic.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Throughout the course of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nuis cochies to drink; afterward make a caustic on the head, and apply the hot oil caustic as well; and also two caustics of the clavicle-cautery above the eyebrows, one near the brows but not touching them; and beware not to clog up the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavelis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the oil paper of the wound is softened by disease and moisture, then use the fire cautery called "olivaret". This is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two cauteries on the same spot as the eyelids are; do not leave your hand except until a third of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	and t they le Clavt y Comis quele ; by: it'issued them.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn to scales and touch the eye, and one performs cauterization in two ways: that is with fire or with burning medicines.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in a healthy position; after securing (or binding) the eyelids with a figure so that it is similar to the feather of myrtle, and let the beginning sign be close to the hairs. Then put cotton wool smeared with egg white and musk essence on the eye, then heat this cauterization as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization on the area you have marked little by little, let the skin be healed at that spot; and the signs of health in the wound are when you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the height of an egg; then clean your hands, and leave so for iii. days, then apply a cotton ball soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterward treat with ointment until it is healthy again.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come in and the paper becomes soft as before, then resume the cauterization on that same spot; and if the hair is lost, continue cauterizing until the skin rises back to its natural place, evenly, without touching the original point.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization with hot medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment form of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and lively salt, each one in .З. ounces, and grind them well together quickly so it does not cool down, then sprinkle on the form as with myrtle leaves, and put on the paper; and if the illness is only in a single joint, you work with i.i., and in either of these; and put cotton balls into an egg yolk. And let the patient'n be well rested and place your two fingers showing under the medicine, and press .i. and lick every time when the patient feels mordacity from the medicine, as if it is biting like fire because.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, apply the medicinal bandage properly.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the swelling is gone, raise the bandage and see if it appears lifted as if by fire or incision; if so, it's good. If not, reapply the medicinal bandage over the wound until your efforts are evenly done, and your eyes sharp; then put cotton greased with butter until the hair grows out, after which cleanse the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And you must guard your work carefully to ensure the medicinal bandage does not come loose from the eyes. If the paper becomes thin afterwards, and the hairs prick at their tips, resume the medicine over that wound as before; then cleanse it until it is healthy; this is the method of "the fool's folly":
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this, be their constraints; and do not return them by the straight path for those who have studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of treating a fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then it is proper for you to perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	the pudvous; but:s: bonstracz;
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the swelling and dryness; and if it is closed, work on the bowels; after applying a hot caustic substance, hold your hand to the part of skin above the oil so that your hands do not go mad; and place the caustic substance in the fat of the oil, and let it spoil.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you begin the cautery up to the bone, it is best. Otherwise, resume the casterization one more time and leave as needed, then after applying cotton-like softened butter and treating with drying ointment until healed, if forty days pass without healing, apply corrosive medication until the bone is exposed; and follow according to what appears in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of treating a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. For an open wound, and then apply a subtle pincers with this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make it the amount of a . З. of lead; and hold your hand or whatever firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted to its proper shape; and it is necessary that on the oil you put cotton moistened with this or with egg white: if the lead fills the place properly, then it provides a marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the abscess is healed by the cautery that we have described, it is good. If not, you must administer a pessary to the womb with this, and return the abscess back into its proper place in the body as required.
des crevaices en levres	For ruptures of lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often occur cracks in lips which are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small lancet-like cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here for you have been the li que ite, and soignement dont cured in the next to the cauter les avies on l’ointe as they are treat et so the creter; that of the warts them healments as well: ce que vous m.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or near the roots of the teeth, after it has decayed and rotted and become old and turned into a fistula; treat it as we have described in divisions, but it will not heal: then you must apply .i. cautery according to the size of the fastole; after removing or opening the fistula, hold your hand until the wound is completely closed, and later too; do this once or twice more after the treatment we have described in remedies, until it is healed; if treated thus, it will be good. And if not, then you must expose the area and remove the decayed bone, according to what you find instructed in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Of the slight movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but to no avail, then place the patient's head in a clean spot; afterwards bathe the cautery so that its form will come shortly after, placing one end on a rag over the tooth; insert hot charcoal into the cautery quickly, holding your hand as the patient feels warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and resume the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, leaving it there for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner, the tooth that had moved is confirmed; the softened gums are held steady, and the moisture which was corrupted is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or heat, and medicinal remedries have no effect, then there is need for cautery in two ways: caulteries of butter and caulteries of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take a piece of butter from the cow, and shape it into a spoon made of iron or brass; then wrap cotton around the tip and cover with a tent cloth, causing the wool to stick in the butter; apply quickly to the painful tooth until cooled. Often repeat as long as its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; if you see that the butter-bound wool and cotton have hardened, then place it back on the painful tooth and heat with a hot iron until heat comes to completion under the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Cautery of fire is such that you take an iron or brass spoon, and make it thick enough so the heat does not reach to the mouth of the patient. After heating the caulteries, wait until they cool down before using them; place on the painful toeht and keep your hand there until cooled. Do this often because the pain will disappear that day or the next. And it is important for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter while applying the cauterizer, and then rinse out afterwards; and here are the caulteries:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform a fire cautery on any thumb you wish, according to what you can do; and this is the shape of the stitch.
des scrophules	Of scrofulous growths
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the scrofulous growths are due to cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, then apply the fire caustic of which comes after this shape, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue from the fire cautery on another part; and put the hot cauterization over the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the edge of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply the cauterizations according to the quantity of the abscess and leave so that healing. And after, embalm: and put balms and lotions and tents as long as it sane are.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moistures overcome the channels of the neck, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first drain the patient with soluble medicines; afterward perform a cautery at the root of the throat and ensure you do not reach up to the throat itself nor burn the skin but only slightly. After that, make another cautery on the joint at the neck's spine base, and use the cauteries known as "clavile" from our previously described form; treat it so that it is healthy as we have discussed before.
de la toust	When fever overcomes, administer a concoction for reducing heat within the body.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When diseases of the neck are cold moistors, and the patient has no fever nor thirst, and it is an early illness, make two cauteries on either side in the eyes' corners; and another cautery between the buttocks where they meet; and use the cauteries known as "clavile" according to the form which was mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	When you see it, do the point-pricking cautery called "points" as before in the ear disease; and let the points be up to 30 or around that amount. After treating according to what has been mentioned above, let there be other cauldrons of four rounds in this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauldrons are lighter, as you make three from each one:
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding the shoulder joint dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset in place but cannot remain there, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation immediately.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient lies on their back and side; then lift the head inside the cavity of your left hand's thumb; and if the joint is dislocated, apply the heating rod with two nails at its end to shape it.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and heat the head to just above the ribs, using the heating rod with four nails at its end for shaping; this is achieved by caulking with the heating rod that has three nails, as the figures of caulking are these four rods; and each nerve corresponds to the subtlety of a tent, which is the shape of the heating rod that has three nails.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it positioned on this nerve through which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery for scraping with a spoon; after allowing the patient to rest, do not move the limb for long periods until it is fully comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated again, which happens rarely; then make the caustic on the thick part of the clavicle with many cauterizations or pressing. Because the joint is closed, and bone becomes hardened and the patient feels better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	by [un su : (tir; you give meest odonz t fd’s:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one should make pleurisy cauteries from aristolochia root in this manner: take an aristolochia root as long as possible, the longest you can find, and let it dry, making it as thick and long as your fingers; coat it with oil and hold it over fire to create a single cautery between the throat's edge and the neck, two small cauteries slightly descending on the part below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the seventh, inclined slightly backward; one in front of the feet, another above the stomacg, one between the shoulders, two at each side of the chest, without pressing too hard with your hand but rather openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And the ancients said that no man should use a fire caustic resembling shaving, and heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; and then relief comes with pain as we have described in liver abscesses. But in this kind of treatment there is fear or malaise causing death now, or a fistula arises that cannot be healed.
de la mice	It seems like the text got cut off unexpectedly; it says "de la mort."
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When treating the disease of those parts that we have mentioned in the sections on treatments, and it is not effective at all, then there are three ways of fire cautery, which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One way is to make three or four cauteries, aligned with the length of the parts, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient be turned over on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Another way of fire cautery is to use the one with two nerves as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation; and lift the part where the limb's edge comes from the left side, and make elevations that you lift the part according to its size, according to the length of the body, and let the fire cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After putting the two inflamed nerves, keep them until the core is pierced on the other side, and then apply the cautery, so there will be four in total. If you see this, cauterize all with a cautery at three nerves. After curing when it has taken long to absorb pus, and this involves moving like the previously mentioned cures.
de ydropisie	Of edema
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not for edema, but in the manner called "asclytes." When you treat according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment does not help, then it should be done with four cauteries around the hips, one on top of the stomcu, one on top of the liver, one on top of the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the point where the urine comes out.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the fire cautery open for longer periods to purify, do not release the treatment of the sick person afterward; healing would be hastened, and both intentions would be united with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the caustic for the belly is to be a spatula as we have previously shown; and that for the back should be an olive, according to what has been placed there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the fingertips are swollen in someone who is jaundiced, and filled with yellowish bile, it must be that you cauterize above the spine between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery towards you. And do not enter too deeply, thus confining the yellowish bile, and make the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on two legs two cauldrations in each leg at the ankle joint point; and let the cauldration be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cauldrations lengthwise so that bile can drain out; afterwards cure the other cauldrations we have mentioned.
de la menoison	For the treatment of menorrhagia: take three roes from a pigeon and two roes from a capercailzie, grind them in wine, then pour it into a bottle with sugar; this should be taken at every meal for a month. Afterwards, if bleeding persists, perform the following procedure:
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtue that is in the stomach and intestines flows out, it cannot be treated by ordinary methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been explained here before about the cauterization of the stomach, where the cautery circulates; four subtle cauteries around the belly corresponding to one pointed cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistors and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of swellings
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When ganglions are at the base, one or several that are old and consist of large cold, damp corrupted humors, and they have been treated as we have described in divisions, and it is not effective unless you do cauterizations: three on the spine along the back, the one closest to almucantarotus, gradually triangularly spaced apart, and two below the armpit.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think his stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then on the face do a large cauterization as previously described, and one on the liver, and another on the gallblad
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the black substance which is called "theleol"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you come to the joint, heat sufficiently the caustic which appears like a small razor, and then set it all ablaze on that joint being addressed; leaving your hand and the caustic at the origin of the vein until blood flows out from it, so causing little harm; do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large caustic on an inflamed area, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, we will discuss it in this chapter; if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by caustic treatment.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes from any part with old and putrefied matter and corrupted moisture, you must probe it entirely with a very fine tube, and know how much the entire area is affected. After heating the cautery that appears as if one razor, insert it into the fistule according to the amount that entered there, and resume the cautery until the corrupt body parts are scorched once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity of fat needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves which are in them. If the fistule goes to the bladder or intestine, watch out for these leaks, and do not make a hole as if you were going upstream; remember that it is not necessarily pervasive; after curing the leak so that it becomes healthy, and if the leaks are scraped off, and the matters have been removed long ago, then know that the leak is entirely healed; and if the matters have not been removed, know that the leak is inflamed and corrupted at its origin. Thus as we say of one of these in their location.
de la maladie des reins	Concerning the illness of kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	The quidon les mallot li parfaits couvertes d’autre ne est s. 20s autres de ses maint liaut et desir. Et donc le ventrement la m'est, au tient lee avons sus ce que nos vauter eux reis de choses; and the cestez de lesc et, il soie; Estropes:
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, causing the patient to hold urine, then make a fire cautery in the area behind the bladaderies, where hair begins at the tip of the finger; there should be one on each hand, as long as we have mentioned. There shall also be one on the back if needed; and the fire cautery shall follow the form previously described.
de la marris	Of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed endings; when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary tract cautery, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauliflower-shaped cautery be made as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous veins descend to the hip bag, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lion's share of the testicles is found in the departure region, so you must cauterize the patient with one caustic resembling a circle on the hip bag, and mark before the groin within the circle, ensuring that the bag is inside the circle; and let the cauliflower-shaped cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three large olive oil-based cauterizations, and the cautery should be as close together as possible like all keys; apply the cautery until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Pain of the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in division and treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the sick of large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good pills that appear similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the method of cauterization is in two ways: that is to say, with burning medicines and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization has many methods, among which one is such: you cauterize on top of the ham thigh's pouch, three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, ensuring good depth and size, and leaving space between each cautery as wide as a thumb; it should be an olive-shaped cautery. Another method is not done in the middle above the head of the thigh, because there are four following this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cauterization on the circular cautery as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it so that the circle contains the entire thigh and all the space around its curvature is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way to do in sciatica when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach up to the thigh or leg; and if it reaches the thigh and leg, then make two cauterizations where the patient says that the pain bothers him, and one cauterization above the ankle four thumbs. And be it should be a cuticle-shaped cautere, and should be burned thickness of the curvature; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two feet or near the heel, then cautered where at the pain three points or four fingers with the cautered called «points».
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If it is necessary to do so and if the pain increases; and if it seems that the pain moves from above the knee towards the thigh, then perform a cautery using either an ear-spoon or circular caustic, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave behind either the caustic used or damage to nerves and major arteries, causing further harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen others who made a cautery on the ankle near the foot, and they continued it until the leg was completely swollen, along with the foot as well, which became pierced and corrupted throughout; afterward, there came death from his belly.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places together, perform a cautery on each one accordingly. // The wise ones said of the haunch caustication, here follows this manner, make a piece of iron as big as a small finger or slightly less, and it should be through holes and spaced so that the quantity from one end to the other is like a pea's knot; the spaces are over two parts evenly spacculed, and also shaped like those mentioned. And there should be an iron strap well made; here is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	First bathe it until all is red and sticky-wet, then place it on the pouch of the affected leg, and twist with the sound ribs; and cauterize once using a hot iron rod and leave for three days; then apply beef suet, and let the open wound remain exposed for a long time; after applying ointment until healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few are seen using it; however, this is a good cauterizing method that can be endured, where one finds comfort.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive evacuation, or like cold matter expanding, none of these cases call for cautery unless it is someone who has taken in cold substances.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has expelled fetid pills or other similar substances, make them lie on their back where the pain is located. Three lines marked with 'X', and in each line, 5 cauldrons or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and perform the cauterization as per the cauldron called "points". If you see this: do 3 caudrons or 4 at the clavicle midline according to this method.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes in young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they stand up, and fear; and you find at the base spine of their back and above the appearance that comes across other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this wound and examine it, apply the fire cautery according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the fire cautery needs to touch each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, apply the hot caustic around the spine with a tool that makes 2 or 3 lines and be close to one another. After curing the area until it is smooth as we have said, be careful not to perform cauterization in an indented area where there may be nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	On the treatment of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is from moistures that have spread to every part of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which those called 'gout' properly, and when it is caused by coldness and remedies cannot heal it, then they are treated with caustics thus: make a ring of caustics around the joint of the foot, and let the caustic be olive-shaped in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is a need to grasp above the face of the foot, let the caustic be made over all the caustics called 'points'. And if pain comes near to joints and other joints, which often happens, make a caustic on each knee .iii. or .iiij. from each side, in olive-shaped form; and if more is needed, then add more, but do not keep your hand too close until the color of flesh is scorched.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if pain descends to knees and the back, administer the caustic as we have mentioned in our chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, make points around the gulf .ij. lines; and if no pain remains in the joints, then do a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pain comes to the shaft or shoulder blades, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and prescribe remedies. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be well aided by God.
de la routure dou syfac	From the custom of sucking
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the sucking custom causes swelling and veins protrude anew, then when you see it to be healed, do not let them pass by without action that day; and use things that ease their stomachs so they can expel from their belly; afterwards sit on one's back between the hands, and command them to rub oil until the veins are repaired, and massage your arms, and give a gentle push under the sucking area over the bone of the wrist, and make any sign resembling half a circle above their body; then prepare the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then rub it until it is white and sweaty. Next, massage the veins at their location; and have the servant oil his hand so they do not return backwards; and work well on the limbs of the sick person, and place a pillow and a sergeant under the thighs, and another under the buttocks that he rubs with his hands; then apply the cautery over the mark made by your entire hand, and straight up and down until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it on the first try, then repeat again as many times as necessary until you get to the bone; and be careful that the vein does not come out while doing the cautery; do not burn it; and ensure that by this the sick person does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you approach the bone with cautery, your efforts are of no use. It is necessary for the cauldrons used by children to be subtle according to their size and those of large people also sizable according to their measure; after four days heal the wound from burning butter until the scalding is gone; afterwards treat with other ointments until it is healthy, and let the patient rest on his back for forty days so that the wound may be well united; and it must be ensured that their movements are long-lasting so that the swelling does not come out when they begin to stand in chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, have him properly dressed with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; let there be good rest so that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and shouting loudly; and when this instruction is done, then he will be completely healthy. And I will now say after the tailor's treatment in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the abdominal pain treatment.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When skin growths appear in other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and it should be as much as two-thirds of the original; afterward heal as we have said; and none of the ancients have stated that it should be cauterized with a fire caustic at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the base of the growth and draw a line for its width above it, and another below, and hold your hand over the entire fire caustic. But the first caustics are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain occurs in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain persists for a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it is necessary to perform cauterization using the caustic known as "points", applying the caustics according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, virtue, location of twists, and its pain. If the first caustic proves effective, that's good; otherwise, begin with another caustic on top of it, for it is customary that the treatment should move closer to the affected area so that you can perform cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Messelecy or massage therapy
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Massage therapy can be beneficial at times with the aid of caustic treatment, particularly in cases of disease arising from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. Can you apply a cauterization here if the illness is in its early stages, and if it has been treated according to what we have discussed in the division; neither delay nor hesitate, as if corruption may spread throughout the entire patient, then perform five causters on the head: one above the forehead near the root of hair, and the other at the front towards the end of the eyebrows; two above each temple, and one behind the ears; and let your hand reach to the bone so that the cauterizer can be reached out as much as scales come out, such that vapors from large humours may escape.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the swelling is widespread and clearly visible, it is necessary to perform cauterization with the cauldrons we have mentioned before: one at each corner of the head, two on the spine along the neck, five on the spine down the back, a large one over the navel and another nearby; two on both shoulders, two on the hip bones, two on the tendon of the ankle, one above each joint in hands and feet, and below the palms' pits; beware not to burn any nerves running along behind it; never cauterize directly over a bone such as the knuckles or stomach, nor liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Know that the more cauldrons you make, the more help they provide, and the patient benefits; know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as healthy ones do because their bodies are already completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cauldrangs to be large or small depending on the members and joints according to what you find in handling irons. After removing them, apply wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
de enfleure	Remain vigilant that after extracting cauterizations, use a mixture of wheat flour and honey as long as the wound is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then apply cautery to the affected area according to its size and smallness; the cautery should be a little bit into the skin's color. Then treat with ointments until it is healed. Cautery has also been done on the hand, foot, and back at the place where nerves move the limb, so there is bone deformity; however, do not interfebre any sinew if you are not familiar with the body's muscles and nerve openings.
de albaras	The use of cautery to address swelling in specific areas necessitates careful application based on the affected limb's dimensions; a slight penetration into the skin is advised for visibility. Subsequent treatment should include ointments until healing occurs. Additionally, cautery has been applied to extremities and spine locations associated with nerve function that can lead to bone deformity when not properly managed; however, intervention in such cases should be avoided unless the practitioner is knowledgeable about muscle functions and neurovascular pathways within the body.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then apply cautery slightly with a cautery according to the quantity of color change; so that the blueness turns white, and the color changes; then treat with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves juice, along with bull testicle blood and duck's blood, each part by part; and mix it all together, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the place until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When an ulcer begins to develop and you see it can be stopped, cauterize with the fire that forms a full circle around the entire ulcer. However, the wise ones say they also do cauterization within the core of the ulcer; however, this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become further ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen such done before; moreover, a more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around, with fire called "circular," as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot die out
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone suffers from a disease called "adubelati," which is slow to death due to excess or because of the weakness in the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or time; if you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by poking; afterwards leave it as such. For it will be inclined to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, heat the cautery of which there is a shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand within the disease called "adebelati" until the core of the cautery has been pierced, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels behind in a way that the course of putrefaction is alleviated. Afterwards heal it completely when it is sound.
li cure dou feu par fer	The healing of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	There is another way of disease called 'corrosive,' which is nothing but a mass on the limb, for it consumes the limbs just like dry torches are consumed by fire. If you see this disease in place and the patient can suffer cauterization with heat, then accordingly perform small and large cauterizations at the location where the disease or malady is; after cauterizing all parts until you have eradicated the entire corruption, leaving nothing of it such that anything corrupted be osteoed. And then leave for .iii. days, applying oil compresses to the cauterized sores until the fire-blisters are healed and all corruptions gone. After this treatment with anointments producing charm; and if after .iii. days it remains healthy, that's good; but if not, resume cauterizing on what is left of the corrupted limbs. And this mass has never been treated in place by ague medicine before cauterization with fire; however, cauterization with fire is more helpful, and I have already stated the treatment for ague medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of pus that comes to the joints.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often it happens that in the feet a disease arises behind which is called "close" according to our understanding, and is a large swelling causing pain to the foot. And for this disease, there are two kinds of cautery: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery consists in heating a caustic as if it were a bellows' tongue, made from good iron that can reach all parts of the nail, with subtle margangs; after making it hot on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the heat at the tip. Leave it so for three days until it starts to discharge pus; then make an ointment of ground barley and wormwood seeds, leave the ointment on it all night, and the nail will draw out and be uprooted from its roots. Then treat the foot with emollient cream until it is sound.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	If they are turned forward on the body, and it often happens both in hands and feet, then you must use hot water caustic; and there is a particular way: take a tin of copper or iron, or a bellows' tongue, place it over the nail with its handle, that is for verrues; place the tin so that it encompasses entirely, then put some warm water on it, hold your hand firmly and press with your hand as you turn until the edge of the tin reaches to the root of the nerve, allowing the hot water to find a deep pathway to the root; let the patient suffer a bit from the burning sensation of the hot water for an hour. Leave it this way, and it will uproot all its roots. Do this again afterward until you extract everything from the body, then treat with emollient cream that nourishes.
li cure dou trembler	them on; This is not to: est untines a la chauges until the be it. The time that tand rele your de ouga:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shivers from coldness of nerves or fever quartan or other, it is necessary that you make them four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra; and one incising and binding, and another near the stomach with an olive oil caustic. This will cease their shivering, and restore health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Of pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Never visible from behind the body bathed, or pus-filled sores that arise from large corrupt matter. If in the first instance they appear that you must cauterize each head of the pustule: a subtle caustic made from wood mistletoe, with its point heated by fire, or from long astragalus root, or at the lenticular caustic. And never do we cauterize them at first when they appear, according to this manner; but it cannot grow further forward, and the excess is disrupted, making them healthy; but it must be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times it occurs that great blood flow from an artery cut to the wound on the surface or during abscess incision or member caustery, and similar things; and it is a very grave thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when it occurs to anyone, hurry to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and strain very hard until the blood is calmed below your finger, and ensure that no more flows out; then put olive oil causterys both small and large as long as they are all red; then take some, either great or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery above that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	When it bursts out as you lift your elbow over the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do one after the other until the wound is closed; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no other illness comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly close it on your own if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways we have mentioned: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or by strongly twisting a thread, or by medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and be glued and strained simultaneously.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will perform the proper closing of straining tightly with cloth or applying burning substances above, or similar things; if it does not benefit greatly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger under the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it out until blood remains on top of the wound and vein; do not move it, but frequently moisten it with cold water so that it is very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and stops flowing; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatment methods.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have told you in the first chapter, all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, causes, extracts, and forms of cauters; and I placed this chapter up to the fingers, and I will proceed with this chapter through the same path so that one finds it easier.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauteries, hence greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision over an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to embark upon folly. For many ways of healing come from those who have endured so much with their illness that they die easily due to the desperation brought about by their disease, and its severity; and we should fear for these ones.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among those who give their attention, and say: "Wait, I am the guardian"; but the illness is despised. You should not agree to what these people demand from you when they approach with this manner; instead, place greater importance on your honor than your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely based on that which you are certain of and can have experience with; apply prognostication and indication in treatments for your sick to where health is converted; and this will assist you in acheboring good renown, glory, and memory in the kingdom.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son of our lords, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as seen in the chapter of cauteries that I have explained from head to toe, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Full of water within the head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is said that this illness often occurs in children being born, and when the sack exerts too much force on the child's head; there has never been a case where it was not caused by this.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in beasts other than children, and of all those that I have observed it hastens death; therefore, I deem it worth mentioning the treatment section separately.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	en son's tre ;
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is too much moisture and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone and the signs you see are at the joints over the top of each part, and it feels like water when pressed with your hand inside, and has not been reset: then it must be cut into three incisions according to this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all moisture thoroughly. After cleaning with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave so until the fifth day; then let it heal by bandages and ointments, and allow the head to be balanced evenly, and give dry meat to the patient in small amounts as long as the limb is strengthened and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to examine where the head of the abscess lies and its water content; for it's never in front, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Thus cut where the abscess head is and its water content according to your ability; be careful not to puncture an artery, ensuring there is a flow of blood so that the patient does not die from bleeding or loss of moisture.
de reume	To restore
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and the illness is long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is to perform cauterization with the tool used to tie off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary that when you cover the eyes, the patient must keep his head back; after wiping the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract one layer at a time from the neck; then look where the veins are located, and each eyelid's muscles are behind the ears, and they do not return much; then tie off each eyelid's ends with a stitch or two. Continue until you reach the bone, using one that is broad at both ends.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, tie off the artery with a stitch from above and cut it just as two points cross over.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is opened, blood flows continuously from it.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to touch or feel, you should measure the space of three fingers, then tighten and bind up to the bone; and the amount of blood that needs to be let out is five-six drams (about 276 ml), plus or minus depending on what the patient can endure and the replenishment of the artery. After examining the wound: if it remains above the bone without a sphagmous point, and no pus does not appear from it, then stretch the wound and sew it up, then apply an ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	From gouty inflammation
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When gouty inflammation comes early and catarrh with moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headaches and such things occur, if it is treated by various medical methods of medicine and nothing benefits him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have discussed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient should have their temple hairs shaved back, and listen for the pulse of the artery which opens in the temple, because it beats clearly and heals quickly compared to some men who are too cold; and if it recovers, strain a bandage on the wound from the patient using rough fabric, then rub the area with warm water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatula like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	First lightly scrape the skin to reach the artery, then turn it at the edges and separate well the threads that are below from each part; if the artery is delicate, twist with a pin's point, then sew up the area according to the quantity of the two veins. For if not sewn shut, they do not heal entirely in all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And tie the blood of the five veins until three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind them in two strong threads of silk twisted together so that sores do not come before the wound's closure, and running bleeding does not occur; then sew up any excess between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with a cautery knife to the bone as long as the veins are tied off; this is the proper work, provided that the patient has no fever and is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For caustics aid in finishing wet wounds; thus they are of greater help to wet wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, fill the area with fine cotton and place well-made bandages; and when they are removed, treat them with dry medicines that promote healing, and use dressings until it is healthy; and if there's a lack of blood flow from where you work on it, quickly cauterize using hot iron or fill the area with vitriol and strain using your hand so that it becomes unblocked; and if not present, apply cold water to the site until numbness occurs, cool the area with cold water until congestion clears, and restrain as necessary; and those easier and lighter in artery extraction are cauterized at the vein of this sharp caustic iron (cautery) with two parts, but ensure the edge is well dulled to last longer against heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when inflammation is too hot, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And when it is two spaces between the points, and then you must have a heated until to the bone, and cleanse the vein for both sides, and they are far from the veins; and bevelled on both sides. And so that there is this caustic cauterize:
des larmes	By tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of eyes run down into veins near the forehead's upper part, and no medicine helps when administered there, you see the patient's face grow red like frightened flesh; and if oil is applied and moist enough that hair strands fall out, leaving burns from the heat of the tears, such treatment may be necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	They used to call it "contusion cure" in ancient times, and you do the same for a patient with this illness who has hair on his forehead: make three cuts or equal lengths according to the forehead's width; one of them goes through the middle of the forehead downwards until the nose, while the other two are made as if they were two ribs above the eyebrows. Be careful not to incise arteries that lie on either side under the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbone's length for each wound should be three thumb lengths.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have ready a piece of sponge and plenty of cloth to wipe the blood, then apply the cautery stick with two ends which is this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that goes from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all flesh that is between the two cuts until it reaches the sphenoide bone, then make another section from the middle incision up to the other end, and then extract this cautery stick.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "culterale" in the first cut, and it is very sharp on one side, but also soft so not cutting, and that is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hold the ribs cutting towards the chest where you can see, and the ribs away from the bone, and move until reaching the mid-fracture. Close all vessels that arise from the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to who opens the eye, then again in the middle fracture up to the other side; then extract blood equally, and express the wound for the taken blood; then put a tent of old cotton into each fracture, and cover with drapes soaked in wine and oil and ointment, ensuring that abscesses do not arise; on the third day remove the bandage, and apply large plantain leaves steeped in water, then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eye sockets
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When frequent cases of eye sockets become swollen and small, and sight weakening the vision, and eyelids burned; and hairs falling out, and it causes great pain in frontal headache, and individuals suffering from such ailments are often caused by these conditions that this blindness but they arise from various venereum; and treat so beware of, and therefore cure, and thus:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one. A little bit. Begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, making the incision up to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves at the temples when they move while eating. When the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto a sponge, then place cotton between the two sides of the wound and cover it with linen cloth soaked in wine and oil; take care to prevent heatstroke from an abscess; when it has healed over, you must rub the bone until new growth begins, then apply curative salves that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts wax, and mix them together to form an ointment; apply it to the wounds for overall healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	For ear bleeding.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, pieces of mineral or similar substances; seeds, as in pods, peas, beans; or fluids flowing like water and easily passed, such matters.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it flows from the ear as a stone or other substance not naturally close to the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear in sunlight. If you see the stone, then distil any small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then proceed with extraction; and if there is sneezing due to this condition, plug the nostrils when sneezes occur, and put cloths or wool near the ear; elevate the ear above. This often brings relief through this treatment; but if it does not improve, arrange for delicate tweezeback removal as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it has improved with tweezing, that is good; if not, arrange for extraction using a small delicate double-ended forceps; and if it still does not improve, make an incision at the top of the opening or keyhole in the ear canal, and remove any wax buildup so that nothing can enter with the swab. Then treat as before, because often this brings improvement as we have said; but if there is no such improvement, take a substance like birds use, and insert it using a precise instrument of some sort, then place a small cotton at the opening; then press gently on the stone or whatever it may be, and treat as before.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If none of the issues we have discussed occur, then quickly fracture the ear before an abscess appears or a swelling arises, and spasms; the manner of the fracture is such that you first comfort the sickly in his head, drain the blood according to its strength, then make him sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, creating a small fissure at the root of the ear where fat or tissue lies; let it be as a crescent until reaching the bone, then set the bone as much as you can, and squeeze out with haste into your mouth; cure until healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a stone that exists and swells, make a careful extraction; if it cannot be removed, then create a fine tube according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision on that stone. But do not perform this when you think the stone is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many cuts; then extract with fine tweezers and sucking, as we have said, so that the extractions be successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the case where the patient's head enters the ear, it is necessary for them to use sneezing as a first measure and fill the ear with clean cotton. Place him lying on that same ear where the object is located; if it comes out easily by this means, it is good. If not, take many small pieces according to how much must be kept light and easy, and dry them slightly over fire; then put a piece of cloth or string from his own sleeve in there, and tie on the other side with another small stick above where the object is lodged; continue placing sticks one by one until all of it comes out easily. If you see this, take some kind of rod, insert one end into the ear, heat the other end over fire until the rod becomes hotter than the others; then replace with new rods until the entire object has been removed, as we have described in the chapter on stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	For extracting the object, if it is of small size, like an insect or similar thing, treat as we have described in the section on removal; but if it is large enough to be felt, then arrange for extraction using forceps; and it is easier to remove whatever has entered into the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	For removal of artresir. se sont que l’oreille qui coure par le tennis tu l’oreille ne vuidier despiroire les tiers mains, et li mors sainsirs a l’a piere as ourtre tost; si condeuoir: la nostredes de li traits securer cestres ce, qui est coure en le curez auir la ou il sient despiere estrils sonts tennent maint quater les orle tout li.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	It is narrowed behind and widened in front. Then put the more subtle part into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient, then continue throughout the entire canal; do this often as long as all hairs grow back. And if they do not obey to come out, then plug around the canal with cotton just as I have mentioned in the stone; and if they do not emerge forcefully as we have said, then apply distillations that the ancients have tried in bee sting treatment, and you will find them or treat by distillation; and distill oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which is the shape as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	It is made of silver or tin narrowed behind and widened in front for distillation; and to press the distillation through an instrument of well-made brass for this purpose, if you see a needle then wrap it with cotton at once; then pour your oil or juice, and as much of your medicines into the canal, so that the canal is in the ear; then insert all the cotton around the needle completely until the oil has been distilled or comes out from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and make sure the distillations are kept warm as when they are distilled in the ear; and ensure they are not too cold, for otherwise the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Pour que tu puisse ceuele que les poilz le oinseu quil estropent lou poignons si sachant que li oui parsont; et si a qui peint, et si bien estroier de. Et si tu ne seroit pas plus bon.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any deformities in their ears and the same thing happens to adults through wounding or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these injuries occur fully within the ear such that one cannot see them; and sometimes there occurs an imperfect perception of sight while hearing remains good.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore if it comes inward and cannot be seen, it often requires thorough healing in various conditions, and when you can see it, make the afflicted ear lie to the sun; then look inside: if there is apparent inflammation, the work is on this area where the form lies.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be thorough and cutting before and behind all plainly, if it does not blister the ear; if the inflammamen is of a foreign object or body parts within the ear, then take with fine pincer-like tools, and clean lightly, until everything has been removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If the obstruction is completely in the ear, take a subtle and light probe and warm it slightly by fire, then put it on the body of the ear. If you feel the blockage causing the patient to have ringing in their ears, carefully puncture it, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the opening, and apply an ointment with barley meal.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not touch the wound for any day until it is closed, then you take a tent and apply an ointment with rosewater, and powder with vitriol paste; if you see discharge from the ear, replace the tent and move another greased tent made of rosemary oil and wax until inflammation subsides; then cure it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and wrap in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood discharge such as distillation therapy.
de la char des papieres	From the collection of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This paper when it comes from the rolls as they are wet and dry, one must stretch them with tongs and clips, then cover it with a paste made from its roots; afterwards place it in lime water solution.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it cannot be stripped away, then with the delicate cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is made, often many times they do not remain on their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and will not return.
de la gresle	les que he as a l'ard; that t s;t; puis quivide le ; theta; J.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times there come to the eyes something that appears like frost in its form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine" [hail], and it is a large amount of moisture both above and below the paper; the treatments are as follows: carefully observe if the hail moves from one side to another, which is an easy thing to know. So make them wide open, then lightly scrape each part, then hold with pincers, and bandage. If you cannot cover it without piercing a bit of paper, nothing harms the patient; and if the fissure is large, gather together in one stitch, and heal until it is healthy again; but if it is small, do not exert force as the ointments will soon restore it and prevent scarring.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending into the inner ear and towards the upper part, reverse the paper, extend the hail with pincangs, bandage and press from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, nothing harms it; and when the hail is healed, wash the area well to prevent scarring until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	And wash the wound thoroughly with water and soap to prevent infection.
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	It is formed from grease found on cloths and papers above, it happens more in children than adults, greatly affecting their eyes, causing them to come upon the cataracts by morning, unable to look at sunlight because tears hasten to their eyes; therefore they lie down on their faces until dawn, sleep with soaked eyelids which are concealed by the grease that appears in the oil. And when you press it therewith your thumb and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the treatment is that the patient places his head on your hand; then take a linen cloth and make a tent shape in a circle according to the amount it contains from each exinach part, then place it over him; press with both thumbs on either side so that the exinach are gathered within the circle; then create a slit in the moisture at the sharpest point of the blade, and it should not be wider than the wound made to the veins. Cut through the skin until you reach the exinancium; and in various positions comes exinaccium from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove with your thumb and turn the cloth to either side until it is spread out; keep your hand turning left and right until you do not get stuck in the incision, don't let any of the blade up to the oil, so that he doesn't cut too much.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the nail does not pierce at the beginning of the cut, gently widen the incision until it appears; then extract as we have said, moisten with linen and water, and place on the wound, and bandage tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such individuals who crush seeds and place them to spoil the moisture that remains. Then heal it until it is healthy again. And if an abscess occurs at the site, treat with plasters soothing until it becomes healthy again.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from paper strips
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs sprout on paper in ways other than their nature and age, they harm the eyes, leading to familiar diseases such as tearing, weakening of the papers, and scurf until it causes destruction of the eyelashes; the treatment follows four methods: by cauterization with fire alone, or by ague medicine according to its specific chapter on cautery, and can be done either by incision and suturing or by pledgets, as I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the chief of the eye in your right hand and then turn the paper with oil towards your left; if it turns well, that's good; if not, insert a needle through every thread on top; and do so near the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and pull one thread across the entire paper, turning it to its edge; then make incisions into the area below the paper, below the displaced hairs, all over the spatulated coatings from the great corner to the small one; then extract a thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen fabric underneath the paper, then suture it with an incision pattern like that of a marten's fur, making sure the stitching is in accordance with the amount you see elevating the displaced tissue.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then take .iiij. çe chierres dores les gué qui seur son ce pliors a toutes les tissans conesme, puis teacqui le oise ligns. Seu li orles. S’est ceste ceux quis, puis dui, et esne la vont .iiij est chier de li peigne eun cheurse s jusla dulie chou ans que tu meuee par les pais; mais nec ansesme lays heu constrasse.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	When it is in another way: and you must shape the paper to resemble the quill of myrtle as we have described, three times removed according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cover what supports the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the pincers, and things are not equal, then take an awl or needle with one thread, and bind it in the middle of the figure; and another thread near the large edge, and the second thread near the small, and join between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand even
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	At no time does the hair of the parchment change color: if it is necessary to use what we have said about making an incision, but the suture on either side is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of fistulae is thus: and you convert the parchment and make them dense according to what I have said, then make two incisions with a sharp instrument as long and wide as the parchnament and the width of the gutter; and tie off both ends or where you hold the threads; then carefully join each part together beneath the parchment on top of oil, and suture the two cuts from each side properly; and leave it so for several days, and the skin that was sutured will die, shrink, and heal, until it fully closes.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, and the ties are too tight, then treat until it becomes healthy again; and if the wound has healed, and the parchment lifts up and cannot grow hair anymore, then you will make the two incisions according to this figure and with this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Take the operations such that you choose a fine needle, and insert it with a thin silk thread; then align the heads and carefully adjust both subtly so their lengths are equal to one palm in length; then arrange in the case another short, fine silk thread, and pass the needle through the first thread; then place the patient's head on your bench; and position it close to the sunlight so that the operations can be seen clearly, for they are subtle and small ones; then insert the needle completely into the root of the hair near the skin, and pierce the paper hastily as you draw along the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the case, and place in it the same hair if there is one or two or three or more; then remove your hand until all the hairs run through the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the case has been treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the case back from all the thread that you have arranged until the opening is exposed; then you will draw both the case and the thread, and leave open two or three days or more, so that the hair grows in its place and a scar forms; and if the hairs are short, accompany one long natural hair with it, raising it together until they are sufficiently separated, and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	And when you can be thread after them that case, and soil not too much oureatement the place until sile tooth a tides of time or long; et leli the filz, as the dents hairs the luex. 5 days.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease known as "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the eye, it occurs in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens through a sudden wound, from cutting, or with cautery, among similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment for this is to split the scar, and separate the lips of it, and put linen bandages inside, and leave them until they are clean; it is not advised to use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts. Because if you do so, the disease returns worse than before; but work with things softening, like fenugreek; and rose water or distilled water, and linseed seed boiled, and ointments of melted oil from any of the oils, and they envelop a bandage, and this treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of this treatment is that you must ensure it does not heal in its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely for addressing this disease so it does not return to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the chariot entering the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease known as "axacrati," is both natural and accidental. The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar causes; the method of treatment involves using a needle with double thread, inserting it into the eyelet so that the threads reach to both corners, then stretching the eyepiece upwards until fully tensioned, with a cap at its end.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns to what it should be, that is good; if not, take a scrap and place it in the tear, then turn the paper over and make two cuts within the torn area; let the eyelets from these two cuts match the angles at which you made your incision, so that when assembled they resemble the shape of a letter with no "j" inside; then remove that scrap, according to the amount needed to support the paper where it is weak, and join the separated parts together using a linen thread; then cure as we have said before with mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a fracture or suture or cauterization, it is proper to make an incision cleanly over the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said above; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise means in all they can do to return the figure to its natural shape; and patients likewise, according to what must be done with work and treatments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	In adherence to the paper's method
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitching occurs on the paper in such a way that it is sealed with the egg whites of an oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then one must place the tip of a razor underneangs the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it out, as much as you scrape off what has been sown into the delicate spot beneath, which should not be too rough nor too sharp so that the patient cannot endure if the suturing is too aggressive or too blunt, then make your incision shall cut through this gathered area slightly; and it should be removed in its natural form; and all that healed, no times with dirty water, but use clean water, and soften, and collagen; then place a tent of flax linen, and put on the oil, and moistened by using water.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	It is said that the nail has two manners: one nervous and similar to a hard sore, and another which is not nervous but appears like frozen moist blisters; when touched with iron and cooked in pincers, it cannot move. Both resemblements begin near the eyebrow and grow gradually until they cover the entire vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of the incision is such that the patient places their head in pain relief position, then you work on the nails. Take paper to your hand, and cook the nail with pincers; gently warm it. Then take a needle, thread a hair from a horse, goat, or cow through the tip of the neede
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch and break the flesh layer, and that the pliers are not pierced; after making an incision, pour some egg into it with a cloth soaked in litharge, and leave until the next day; then treat as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle, and the hooks do not fit in, many times this resembling of a nail has been treated with medicines; they appear as described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the patient's pain, and take a light spatula slightly according to this method:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently lift the nail above and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason is pressing on, distill from your mouth into the oil syringe made of litharge, and with a red straw and cloth wick, continue to treat until the next day; then resume another treatment according to this same method, until it is completely gone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no other matter opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then first treat the abscess until it is healed, and resume the work as before, until it is healthy again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh near the elbow troubles you greatly in your work, suspend it on a hook and cut part but not all, so tears do not reach there; then let red-colored oil distilled with lead leak into the area.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the hair that grows over the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	It is seen in certain men at times red swelling, covering the prunelle and restrained under paper and turned towards the head, appearing like a balustrate rose; the procedures involve that the patient places his head on a towel, then work upon the eyes, wrapping them completely as if bandaging an injured limb, supporting it with strength; afterward remove the first one, shave entirely up to the end, and ensure no oil remains at the work area; incise the spatulum similarly to how we described in nail incisions and minor forces for removing eyelashes, as demonstrated by the shape following this treatise.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Once the incision is complete and all hairs are removed, apply oil with a clean brush or distill red wax and similar corrosive medicines onto the head, ensuring no abscesses remain; if nothing remains, cover with cotton dipped in egg yolk, making sure it is securely adhered to warm sores; if any doubt arises about hot ulcers, leave oil and treat the abscess with soothing agents for such ulcers; then return to your work until healed by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you apply the natural remedy for each type of wound; and do not occur in such injuries to them. And then as long until healed this kind.
des voines des eulz	From veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	These are red veins that cover the eye and affect its shape and weaken it daily. Therefore, when you look into them for the first time, note where they lie, which is a sign, and there is no other disease besides this; then examine it in the following way: instruct the patient to put his head on your palm, then gently compress those veins along their entire length according to your wisdom, and let the veins be doubled subtly as follows:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there shall be two veins by degrees in one course as follows:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then blow the vessels gently, and draw out the blood hour by hour until you see them removed from the oil; and ensure that you do not bleed the oil at the tips of the spatulas, and perform this operation in the middle of the day before the sun, being very diligent in your work so that only those vessels are bled; and when you have done this, distill red and green dye into the oil collar to corrode what remains in the spleen.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to remove it all in that hour, apply a poultice on the oil of soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it untouched until the pain is eased and you are sure there is no inflammamation heat; then resume according to this method as long as they are healthy:
de la fistule de l’oil	For the oil abscess.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When the vein is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and by using hot medicinal ague as previously mentioned, if it is not healed, then in it there is a trick where you cut above the abscess, at the spot where it must die off, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, return with all the instrument as described; it is called "aspre chief," made of iron from a piece of metal shaped like this pointed tool.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the exposed bone area, then turn between your two fingers and press with your hand slightly until you know that corruption is removed; do this again if necessary, then replenish the area with drying remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the leg is swollen and hardened, and the body of the bow remains so for 40 days without healing or forming an abscess, and no other event occurs unless it becomes sane; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula near the nostrils according to this method: and ensure that you open the bone a second time with iron, and with medicinal acids, and when it has been opened take a drill in accordance with this form, so that the head of the iron is at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered up to the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the temple and move your hand away by one pace, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bwart and the patient feels pain if they hold their hand close to their nostril; and then restore the old medicines dry as I have instructed you, and when the swelling subsides and the leg hardens, let the matter go to the nostril; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the nostril
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When all the limbs are opened entirely, and there is no sign of disturbance in the nerve or thinning, then you must bind the patient; then wash it, then apply compresses that do not burn to draw out blood, then place a dressing made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolous. Afterward, strain the dressing, and lay a plaster on bandages and linen; ensure the bandages are sufficiently soft, doubling each one fourfold, and then layer them according to how much the limb requires. Then stretch it by placing a hard board beneath, and resume bleeding without burning compresses; remove the compresses and leave the strained dressing for day and night, and if the binding becomes too loose, you must release it completely. After a day and night, remove the binding, and if you see the wound closing up, that's good; if not, resume using plasters, linen, bandaging materials, and compresses until healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The fall of a sheet or cloth used (in context likely referring to surgical dressing)
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the vein opened and visible, as a grain of resin, and it is hopeful to see; then you examine its workings, inserting a needle at the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle or use doubled thread from that part by the ear; pierce it, leave the first needle according to its placement; then cover the place with the double thread and tie a portion of the vein around it, straining it well, then extract the needle and put on the bandage moistened in abundance; leaving until the threads fall out with the vein, then tend the wound with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by any part of a circle of cloth, until it has been healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give a great appearance, pierce it at the subtle edge that emerges from the eye, and pass a white film moisture and lower the edges, and enter quickly; then extract until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Regarding the bowels of the wound
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This illness called "alcunnati" is not just water collected in the eye, appearing like clear draining but isn't; its treatment method and appearance are such that you make the patient sit on a properly prepared and straight chair, then take their head between your hands with two parts, and move it until you see the water coming towards your eyes. Then fixate it so it doesn't drain further and is disassembled, observe if things go as usual; and if they don't come out from below, understand that it is indeed water, and if the bowstring of the bow isn't prepared as we have said, do so by sitting the patient between your hands again, then take a subtle spatula and gently press on the horny membrane slightly at its continuation with the horny shell and crown until the bow is tense; when it has been released, let drain into warm honeyed water hot or boiled fenugreek and honey, then treat again as another remedy until healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	and soignet: qui les ansii ;andres que la t ret de le corps ne estreit;
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting for a while and the heat rises up its second path, place the bone with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently rotate your hand slightly; then extract the splinter lightly by turning. Then give a little more of healing saffron juice, and pour some oil into it deeply inside. Then put plenty of ointment or soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant honey, and mix with the medicinal oil. We, as well as those who are from our time, place camphor plasters generously.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the splinter cannot enter through the bone due to its hardness, as some people have overly hard nails, it is necessary that you use an instrument called 'alberit', of which this shape exists:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And dole lou desirre les pointee coustidemunde: ousque le tendre de nus, et puis en la ou sime uoigne luysse dure; si covient l’orein parfonde li hue monte au malle dude uis vende ce qui aigle almagda lourve. Et que tu desmondermandee leu cove, et li de tendre estreme.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess comes to pass, on the seventh day you must drain it and apply the remedy for soothing the abscess; once it is pacified, cover the wound with a bandage each day, keeping it in darkness. Then gradually leave the house, little by little, and transform into your former self again; know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one day among us from the Yrach came and told us that in those days people were suffering from an almagda perciet, which caused watering of the eyes, but I have never seen any in our land nor heard of it in books by ancient scholars; and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them seem to see: and they are truly like this.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	The head of those from this same subtlety lies flat on three corners sharp.
de la char sor le neis	And the chariot is placed upon the nose.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	At no time do various chariots emerge or are they placed close together so that some appear like scorpions with many legs; and if there is one such where the chariot has been stained in a wild color, and it also appears bony colored. In those cases of these chariots that are bony-colored and not stained, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; work on its nostrils, pour molten lead into them, and follow up with threading a needle through the wheels; then cover whatever you can support to the delicate tender point of one side until you know that the chariot is entirely bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	on t carne; but 1ire by Chs des t
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the operation is not successful, and moisture reaches the palate, observe whether it is sane; if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, suspect there may be pus in the bone above, which prevents tissue from being cut. Then you must use a linen thread slightly thickened, soaked by hands and spaced apart by an interval of one or two fingers; place the patient's ear on the tip of the thread as much as possible, pull gently until it emerges through the mouth; this method is often used for children in schools, and is quite easy to perform. Hold the head coming out through the nostril with one hand, hold the other head coming out from the mouth with the other hand, and determine the distance between us who are holding the filaments. Perform this until you know that we have removed all pus; then remove the thread, draw blood if necessary, moisten the thread with an Egyptian ointpitain, and reinsert it into the nostril as before; perform this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything left from the pus. Afterward, place a bandage on the nose for several nights until sane, and if medicinal powders are needed, use them; this is the method to purge the head where oil and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, as if it were a vessel; and lead the same way. If you see anything, make a closed vessel for purifying the head; and have one hand to hold the head while heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	they p s, et w with l’s ount cite of arment:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease arises at the head of the neck known as "telul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to sight; therefore, it must be cut off from the beginning, and the bone fully removed, then placed on fire or with burning medicine; and if not promptly done while it's still small, watch carefully for hardness, strange color, poor sensation: do not treat with iron as it is an incurable abscess, because each time it is cut, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from a sensitive area, not of strange color, and you see that it can be completely covered, relieve the patient's fear and cut without causing pain, curing dryness and constriction.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut off and removed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions of continuation occur in one of these cartilages arise, it is beneficial, but for some people. Thus, as to do that when occurs as any, see if the wound fresh blood; and then suture both sides seams, so heal until cured; and if the edges are dry both sides, then suturing them off all parts of the hairs cut off, then s sear it dries with dragon's powder a powdered, and powder anointing powders as any, and s another pouder.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of suturing is that you assemble the thread: either with needles as we have said in the abdominal wound treatment; or with thread, as I have shown to you.
des apostemes des levres	For abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For dense abscesses on the lips that appear like grains of peas, both small and large; then you must turn the lips and divide each one, taking them with tweezeboar-shaped instruments for each part; afterwards apply vitrioline vinegar to the incision site until it is healed; and then apply a soothing ointment, treating the dried areas until they are healthy.
de la char des gencives	From the edge of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often arises on the gums near an abscess, which the ancients called 'albulus'; it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut to its root, allowing blood or pus to flow; then apply vitriol broth or other restraining and drying powders; and if that edge returns after incision, and often occurs, so the abscess is opened a second time, and cauterized: it does not return after causticization; these are methods for closure.
des sordens	For ulcers
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	At times they are gathered in the heads of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough patches that are ugly and sharp; and at no time are the teeth black and citrine and wobbly, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell foul; it is necessary for you to make the patient sit with his head in your hands, and its eyes be on your holy symbol, and remove either the teeth or rough patches that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do this with darkness and greenness, and yellowing and other discolorations, as long as they are healed; and if something is removed that was causing the first reason, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and third, until you have everything removed; know that teeth require various forms of treatments to be cured, according to what the work shows, because those who wrongly extract the teeth have different shapes than those which are extracted between the gums; these shapes and others should be provided with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the teeth and their pain, you must not delay in grinding them as much as possible, because this is a high-quality substance up to the point where there is no excuse for extracting it; therefore, do not hesitate to use force when necessary.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	: assoir quant elle doit tout a estsont pas; thestent, puis tu noir oe les dent sont le temps de par toutes douce n’a, qui dose and soient, d fois quant li sabe, et maintes l'oncles quels se tui.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After an arrow is straightened and broken, take one of these remedies and apply it inside on either side gently, then move the tooth as you did before. And if the nerve is pierced and mixed in, it must be filled with cloth where the roots are; and if it's carefully held with pliers, do not break during extraction; one must skillfully work around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And do well to ensure that you don't break it and leave a part, causing the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness. Also beware not to act as ignorant barbers who, due to their haste and boldness, often break the cartilage without inserting anything we have mentioned; instead, they cause great illness for the roots that remain or for the cartilage they break, as we have seen often; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine or oil and salt; if bleeding occurs frequently, apply vitriol powder there; and if this doesn't work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the remedies that make you move the teeth first have long points and large handles, which do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they have large limbs that do not bend easily when grasped, and are made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold them securely.
de la racine des dens	From the roots of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root of a tooth is loose, it should be placed in soft cotton cloth dipped in butter for one or two days until the socket feels smooth. Then insert tapered instruments called "algefries," which make the joint resemble a surgeon's drill; and they are made like files with this shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	the le Mort; 1.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	When it is large and thick so that it does not break easily, and the root jumps out through this opening, this is good; if not, use all methods available for forming them, which then come afterward.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use the instrument that has two prongs, thus is the form as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments placed in front on the density, and of this instrument which appears like large pincers, thus is the form as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And thus this is the strain that cannot be broken, and know there are many strains of the same kind; and other strains which are not counted among them; and the wise master craftsmen discover by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and illnesses show him, for there are some diseases or the ancients did not teach an instrument due to the variety of parts, so it does not break at all in the cartilage or other bones, but seeks the strains which must be done, as I have told you, and assists with gestures, such is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Let them be large and well-fitted to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; then restore it back with appropriate medicines for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, you have all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to natural shape, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, you should know whether the root remains after the teeth, and it is not located correctly, and cannot be filed or trimmed; then scrape them. And if there are spurs with the teeth, take this instrument as shown in the image, which is similar to a small beak, and it is made of iron inserted into sugar:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the wax is taken little by little over many days due to dental hardness, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that one can be filed down, then file in a manner consistent with its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like filing a needle; and file the tooth little by little over many days gently, so that it does not move until it smooths out; then in the end there are no rough edges at all, and if the grinding has been too aggressive and it blunts the tongue, it is necessary to file down the sharpness until it is even, such that it neither blunts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	When a tooth becomes loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth in front are loose due to percussion or falling out and the patient cannot bite down on anything causing saliva without spitting, even after treating with binding medicines which do not work; then they should be bound with a thread of gold for silver threads turn green and rot but gold does not change. The length of the thread should be moderate, according to the space between the teeth; if you see them tilted, take the thread and loop it through both healthy teeth, then place the gums between the teeth until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side, then resume coverage up to where you started, and carefully pull back with your fingers until there is no movement. The bandage should be tied at the root of the loose tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut off the gums from the thread using pliers, rejoin them between the healthaturi?
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	When a tooth falls out and is repeatedly reinserted into its original position as we have mentioned; only individuals who are skilled and patient should be involved in the process, never attempting to form it with the bone of a stag (i.e., using another material). The tooth is placed back where there was a deficiency, secured as previously described, and remains stable for a long time. This implies that proper dental care techniques are necessary for successful outcomes, and only qualified professionals should attempt such procedures due to their complexity and the need for precision and knowledge of materials suitable for permanent replacement or repair of teeth.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	tions. I2 Confit.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	On no occasion does this dislocation come from below the tongue or nature, as such; or by accident of a quickly healed wound; and the treatment is such that you work on the mouth with the patient's head in place, and lift the tongue; then sever the nerve connection broadly, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there are hardness or pus, and it is of a quickly healed ward, so remove the sinew and cut the broad bandage; and ensure that the incision is not too deep for the artery below; and when you have done this, elevate the head with rose water and ease, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and apply an ointment to the patient's eyes each night so they cannot close. And if bleeding occurs, place vitriol paste on it; and if blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow-burning caustic which is good for this purpose; then treat with another remedy until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is of color or blackness or hardened, so the patient does not feel it, do not touch it as it is cancer; and if it recedes to a blister, and there is moisture, pour on the cautery, and fumigate with a delicate substance, and remove from both sides; and if your first treatment prevails at the work, then place vitriol paste until healed, then return to the original procedure as you finish all; then elevate the head with ease and calmness, and treat with other remedies until healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	ix, liant it is sore, et cest la ore if fain the l'ariz ot dite, but themes: and then let a bone le telle ise the te pierre d’avise et sereaux to pain dites du temps. And sores, the ou noir; si est de eis seize the cures, et of liant, soignez it the lits with lontaint: or les pren till them es ail not ome le t’em.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	At no time comes into the throat swellings called "godath," and they are properly known as two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, be careful: if it is a small abscess with thin color and fatty consistency, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let them grow until they die off, then you will remove them or they would break on their own; and if they are pale in color with fine roots, prepare the instrument to cover, but first ensure that the abscess rests comfortably and is soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, keep his eyes open, have him work his mouth, and press the tongue between your hands at all parts of the instrument; it should be silver or fine iron as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You must press the tongue against all parts of this instrument and observe the abscess, then take the needle and insert it into one almond until you can't push any further; then tie up anything from slipping away with it, followed by covering the instrument part where its form appears to be a forceful tool; however, the head is bent, alternating in position, very sharp, and made of either iron or fine bronze:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	Here's a la est est instrument, et les maintement, you can be all with it the chauquarge d'oftes. ici est to the pliant, and of, but so that the c the instrument, ou sewit is made ongne, just as coi de l’est, here, in a ce que tu pee, et thet ecointend with lances: for you may be any le pain est c.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be sharp on one side, and have no name on the other; and when you have cut out one of the almonds, proceed to cut out the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the sickly with hot water, and water and ease, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle them with hot water or pitted pomegranate peels that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, etc., until the wound is closed; then cure it until it is healthy. And no other abscesses than the two almonds appear in the throat, so cut accordingly as the two almondangs grow together.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was deep in her throat, namely one of small size; and it had been nearly completely closed off the entire throat, to the point where she could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she couldn't eat or drink, and would have died if she stayed this way for a day or two. The abscesses were so swoln that they had burst open twice from both entrances of the neck. So I immediately began treatment; firstly, I inserted a needle in one, then pushed through the mass, removing a large portion of pus; then I repeated on the other opening, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted a needle into these abscesses, and squeezed out part of it; and thus cleared the passageways of the throat for the woman, who now began to drink water and later wine, and continued treating this abscess over long periods. However, the abscess kept growing back in, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so then I tricked it by cauterizing inside her throat: thus it stopped growing again. So I left those areas and only God knew what happened to them afterwards.
de l’uve	after a part of I the space healed with them as if, but did that is often. Et eyebrtee abscessing large I need to do him or not had it so became c which they should be treated by done and throat it was applied over again it back; s untainted, for them after let them long the pass I put then anoints. They were that with stab worm.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When they reinsert into the eye, and it is removed and elongated, then call it "perpendicular"; and if it is from a large and round swelling, then call it "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the wound's sores are healed, and they are subtle, then cut them; and those which are rounded, assembled together and not long, should be incised if they are red or of fat color or black. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have said about its blueness and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we previously remembered; then insert the needle into the eye, pull from below, and cut at .i. of the .ij. extremities as I mentioned for the incision of .ij. almonds. And do not cover more than what is beyond natural limits, because if you cover too much, it will injure both speech and swallowing; after the incision use as we have said in the treatment of .ij. almondcups. If the patient fears cauterization, then apply a device for easing their worry during sensory cauterization. The manner of cauterizing is with sharp vinegar water. And it should be that the patient places his head on your thigh, and then presses his tongue against the instrument we have mentioned in the toolbox; confine with acidic fresh blood vessels so they are not too thick or too thin; and apply pressure as shown here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient's head has a hair or gum on the medicine, like the rim of a spoon, and places the instrument over all of the medicine on the eye; then have the patient lie down with their back against your lap, so that saliva and mucus come from his mouth into the medicine without going to the throat and choking. Then hold your hand over all the medicine on the eye, applying a quantity about half an hour'cups', until you see it become clear and the biting sensations of the medicine subside; if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument through the middle, keeping it on the eye until the cotton turns brown; do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and remove after .iiij. jors or .v. If you need to reapply the gum of the medicine, repeat the process, and after cauterizing apply a swab wrapped in butter, cleanse what is around the area with the medicine; rinse with cold water and gargle until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more effective by incision than with the caustic; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and yellow yarrow and origanum and rue and chamomile and arronge and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in a pot, and place over low heat, and ensure the pot is well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot insert an instrument made as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And be it of silver or copper, and let one end be placed in the patient's mouth while the fumes rise into the nostrangs as long as the eyes are inflamed; restart frequently until the eyes dry up, and ensure that you do not begin this at the onset of a hot abscess, for many things may occur; and do not perform it only during the descent of a cooling abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a hose and place inside its head an eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; because the shell of an egg will not impede the vapor from affecting the mouth, and it is good treatment together with health preservation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And many times sear the throat or spine of fish bone or anything else; if it is thus that you see what you can do so then press your tongue to all instrument under the sun, and move the thing does not and reinserted in the gorge, do vomit patient ais soie also li tissuant is cooked in stomach; perhaps will pass the thing through the venter out; or malaides swallow with sponge or navel piece of lettuce dried bread and dry bread soak up, and then take .i. And then wound the eschies filtront et iesprenuzier liet ; et esponge inlet l’estement; and it come ou a liaire laissiez let. And ete le chauton les estirent que tu et de m etre auaig, si prends est.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	When the swelling is bent backward so it can more easily enter into the throat, raise the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it may not move or push in any bone; adjust so that the patient inserts the instrument, because where it is easier, they will guide it there; whether blowing downward, or guiding it along evenly with all of the instrument until it feels firm.
de la sansue de la gorge	For dislocation of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	There is no medicine for the dislocation of the throat as I have mentioned in the division with the treatment of medicines; and if it does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sunlight, and press their tongue against the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the swelling, squeeze it entirely with a small pincers or fine tweezebacks as appropriate; and if this does not work, take a hollowed bone, place it in the throat of the patient, then push hard against the bone with an iron rod repeatedly. And if the patient's swelling is colored with water all day, then fill a glass vessel full with cold water, and wash their mouth, and mix it until they can swallow, and move it often by hand; and as soon as the dislocation feels the water, it will pass.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with aromatic substances using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times because it will find relief eventually. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot where there are burning charcoals, and cover it with a cloth perforated at its center, and through which the head of the instrument passes; then pour your fumigating substance, and have the patient place their forehead in the mouthpiece, closing the mouth so the smoke does not escape but travels to the brain; thus the sinuses will be relieved now, and if it does not come out, begin the fumigation process again many times. Allow the patient to experience thirst and consume unsavory things both salty and sweet, without drinking water, until they must exit by this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to treat sinuses is similar to tongs bent for insertion into the throat; and it resembles the beak of a surgeon's tool, with roughness like sandpaper so that whatever is inserted does not slip out. Here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The instrument used for treating sinuses; and it looks like has texture similar to surgical procedure as the beak of a surgeon's tool, thus:
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many types of abscesses, as it comes to memory from this book and others afterward; they vary in perforation and cutting; and there are two ways, one being the same kind but due to moisture, and the other for wounds within the body. For abscesses on the head are different than those at the base, and abcesses in joints are different from those that arise elsewhere, each having their judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If an abscess does not need to be pierced until it is fully matured according to its development; and for such kinds that require being pierced when they are ripe, and do not die following their completion, as in the case of an abscess near joints. For abscesses arising near jointangs, if left untreated for a long time, it may cause corruption of ligaments and nerves at the joint, causing contraction in that limb. Or if an abscess is on the main limb, if you delay the piercing until fully matured, it will harm the main limb; or if near the base, one should pierce as soon as it has ripened; and do not pierce an unripe abscess except for those near the base that have spread throughout and become a fistula; and cannot be cured in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and it diz semblanz; si la perforation, et se tandans. Et li ait on leis qui est dui cilue sont auent; et demeuns que te mourts as evez quant il en escheutres pierre ou les aposteme ne plues tu lor.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases where they swell, treat the affected member accordingly. And when abscesses are in their place filled with pus, leave the perforation open until digestion is completed, as we have said. For if you pierce it too soon, the venom of poison spreads throughout its body and it becomes full of foul matter; and by chance they may become hardened, the lips and deep wounds of which. And with any abscess that expands according to the width of the body, as the member requires. You must treat small abscesse
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those without a head, if superficial abscesses are present like swelling, pierce it easily; and when the abscess is large and has formed a substantial curve, pierce it so that you don't empty all of the pus at once but part of it; then let the abscess bleed until the next day, then do not pierce anything further; repeat this gradually each time more than the last until the entire bend is straightened; especially if the patient is weak in spirit or a woman bearing children, young children, or old decrepit men. For sometimes the arrowheads may pop out with the exit of the pus, which could potentially kill the patient, so be cautious. Therefore, treat this procedure with great caution and once you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound; check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a simple lump, dress it with linen or old cotton cloth; but if there are many holes in large abscesses, ensure that each one has its own dressing so they touch each other; and if you have pierced part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old thread or shredded linen until the third day; then remove it and apply ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	man and:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of pus-filled boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Certain types of small abscesses occur; they are similar to the folds on an animal's skin and there are many varieties. There are some that are fatty with moisture like hair, while others are hard to touch at their base. None of them cause concern when touched by a tool called "entromissor," as one can feel it afterward. This is because if they contain moisture, they secrete from above the long way. And once the moisture has been removed, scrape without leaving any hair that contains that moisture behind; otherwise, it will return when left alone. Then dip a piece of cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; or alternatively in water and oil, and apply to the wound until the next day; then wrap as before with a bandage for one night. And so you do again on the second day, and so forth, continuing until you are sure it does not remain open during the night. Then treat the wound with suitable ointment until healed. If there is fatty matter in the abscess, cleanse according to this procedure: wash thoroughly; drain any pus; scrape off all parts; and apply all your dressing care on the covering where it resides; and if the tool causes trouble, do as I have instructed previously. Similarly treat an abscess that is hard like a lump or cysts as I have said before.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And on the swelling above the abscesses or of pierced wounds and moist, it is more easy, for there is little blood. And if any of these types of abscesses do not have moisture, such as in some cases of old women's abscesses where I found an abscess hard like a stone, rough and bloody, which could not be broken; and if someone had struck it, they would have made a wound as from a stone. For other types of abscesses coming out or above the head in children and at the roots of ears, the opening must always be kept small so that pus can exit; and treat them as required.
des scrophules	Scrofula is an illness caused by tuberculosis bacteria affecting the lymebones or surrounding lymph nodes, often presenting with swelling on the neck's side. It was commonly treated in medieval times using fire cauterization and other herbal remedies to draw out pus and promote healing.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	The text appears to be a maladie de the les s'en; si l'est le bon espleier estemps tandit est lou scrofula iexarose se li fistile douche, et est laiset n’le en qui ne est ques eus. Ne tu losse les veoirsie est maladies ne est il est que on de la mains a cest. Sui leu, et esprendiz s’en lou ie chescuns le miex se si keur l’et li est. Est parles mein li scophis eist l'est dandit. 5
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you open the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, put vitriol paste in the wound, or various powders that stop bleeding, and squeeze the wound; then leave it until the abscess is calmed down and softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood stops flowing, return to your task as long as you complete it; then follow your proper direction if there are no small scrofulous lumps, remove them and cleanse them. And if in the vein root of the scrofula there is great swelling, do not cut out that scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it hang freely without harm; then apply a woolen cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary to sew together the two edges of the wound and hold them in place so that there is no excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary for you to follow our instructions when coping with its root and extracting the fatty tissue; then puncture those scrofulas containing excess as they appear, just like before described; then treat them with ointment and similar substances so that what has been removed from the corruption decomposes. And once the wound is well-cleansed, apply aromatic balm until it is completely healed.
de squinance	And if you to oil any residue of excessive as weeping; and ointment so what remains like that they remove with.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote of the treatment for a sore throat; however, I have never seen it practiced in our land, and this is according to their writings.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have swelling, it is necessary to clear the flap of the throat called "epiglote"; and nothing can be done about this because all veins and the main organ causing fever are located in individuals with abscesses burning either in the mouth, or the throat, or two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the organ, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we split it from three or four circles or a small slit across, between two circles or by the quantity of the slit on the side.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those eyes if they are connected to the section of the epiglottis so there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to its full length, then split the flesh as far as it reaches the windpipe; and avoid blood vessels, unless you see something, and then cut out the abscess, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	It is demonstrated by the cutting of the throat muscle which falls apart from where it is torn, and due to the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leaves an open wound exposed for a time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed to doubt strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound on its edge, and the entire skin overlies the membrane; then apply medicines that cause heat to grow until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	by:
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then block the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And so they instruct the patient to leave the wound open until the effects of the illness have passed, which takes about three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	Then they command to sew up and cleanse the wound when it is healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	byt's (or:
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden took a knife, and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe below the cartilage.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I hurried to help her, finding her as close to dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found blood issuing from it; and I saw that she had not bled from her veins or any other passage except through her throat, and the bleeding was strong from the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	by: a the old with ou rered
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	Et it did not happen to the lady until she was red with voice, and returned afterward to her own condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I say that in treating the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	withd so they istoi-so and c s. ougter lese in the ouest on theirt.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	There are two ways: natural causes, and by accident, where nature has no remedy.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And accidental causes have two ways: one appears similar to us being greedy, and the other way resembles an abscess that arises from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it brings fear, and surgery should not be performed without cause in those who are slight, and one must test and search for everything amiss:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	by far l’s la: c� the 1 fe :
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And examine everything thoroughly, and treat as it ought to be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways in us, of which I will say all the similarities:
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And therefore it is necessary for me to explain the entire difference between them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an abscess is swelling and fever-inducing until the boiling over is past and it has been completed, then rests both fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With ours there is no fever nor heat nor pain, and contains a boil which is its own pouch and follows the color of the body, starting as soft as wax, but becomes hard.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	ce te c so; Ouds (doze acessd.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When attending to the patient's wound, first examine and question with all the instrument called "intermitted," according to its form or procedure which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you squeeze or find more moisture where you see it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the inflammation has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the "intermitted" instrument, and be careful so it does not hurt him too much.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs through the veins, let it have its own color as I have described for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	If after the entorse injury no moisture comes forth, it is fat, so treat it as described for other abscesses: drain it with a lancet and lightly scrape from each part, then cover the wound where it lies, ensuring that you dress it healthily.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot treat it cleanly, remove by parts so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	the text are, so e, also and her acta seme tirxe bonstrait; "et;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it remains for a while and the wound grieves him, apply some poultices of corrosive acrid powders to the wound, bind the wound, and put soothing substances on the inflamed abscesses, and treat other conditions until he is healthy again;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If the wound is large, cut both sides of the wound's lips, and treat what causes pus;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	tol so as ete le quittes a is not l’an vient la mot: 1 les kee de parle d’est of patious ouri, li gist et sont they;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of entwined intestines, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; and there are three compartments called "albaret," one which is called "breb"; and in three sizes again: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistulae.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and are like the needles used to pierce sorcery marks, made of citrine or iron or silver, and yellow-tipped ones work best, which are more effective in blackening when circling abscesses of a fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the widths of pores.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two heads in three ways each.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and those with three heads, which are also in three ways each; and tumors with two heads, but only one head each, and these are also in three ways each; all of these must be in their proper place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The main types of these are cutting, and among those there are some that do not cut at all except from one side, which scrape the skin, so that neither vein nor nerve is severed.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And from these interruptions are hernias restored in bands, so that the patient does not experience pain upon opening abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	they de lion iste Ande.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	At no time is another small instrument used, resembling the shavings of splints, according to this method, where one attaches blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And at no time is one placed in such a way that it touches the veins for copulation, and arteries, and again according to this great method:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	the p that it.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And they remain disfigured and swollen; those who wish to treat them must do so according to the form of this line: B.J until G.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape the fatty tissue and dress the wound with medicinal charm-infused ointment, then sew together the three edges of the wound, and continue curing until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And the breast falls to one side, and is softened by its size, as with women, so it must be supported underneath, with two rib-like structures above, through similar incisions.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Why one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the treatment, until it is sanitary;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not sanitary, or the incision is not entirely healed because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with fine cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it remain until it devours what remains of it and the fat, then heal it so that it becomes sound again.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses on the elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	And often it is found in places or any swelling of, and are from them that the oment wherein lest.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those then which contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line B down to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowel that is in an abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles like scrofula, treat it as we have described for the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound fills with bowels, prepare a fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the procedure of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it hardens, many abscesses occur, and likewise there occurs bleeding from an opened vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one grabs hold of it because of the artery, then the abscesses are large in number;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and softe et the li s rout
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to attempt this with an abscess, especially when it is under the jaw and in the armpits or neck, and there are many other locations where it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one must avoid the use of iron cures, and those with headaches should also avoid them, and in cases of artery swelling above the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work on the tonsils, gently separating the arteries from the sheaths until they are exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle underneath it and pierce until the opposite side is reached, and tie off the vessel with a double thread as I have shown you in extracting the two vessels that are in temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the joint between the two ligaments using an intrusive instrument until the blood flows out and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then prepare a poultice as instructed earlier, while the sutures are healing.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is by the size of the vein, then you should bind to your hand whatever you can of the abscess on all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then apply the needle at that location where you hold it in your hand and pierce it, and have . I two strands of this tie on both sides;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	First bind the abscess as I have told you, where the threads from one of the two heads meet with the two bones.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the threads are not strong enough, then rebind another needle through all of it in the incision from the first needle, and strain the threads at four lengths apart.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cover the abscess until all excess has dried up, then cut away the scab and leave what remains attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	;t;
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come from the artery and vein; they form in the nerves when struck or due to excessive strain, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often with shoulders and elbebs, in all places where there are joints; it is a particular kind of abscess, its color resembles that of the body, and causes pain in various ways.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	s
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	Et mettre bien tout autour, et ne bouge ni vers l'avant ni vers l'arrière, ni sur les côtés, et celui dont la tête est disloquée doit être immobilisé sans métal : autrement, il pourrait y avoir une contusion.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And he who is at the crown or forehead makes a wound with a scalpel.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If abscesses are small, then cut it out with pliers and cover its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, if the suspend it to the sling and pare, then the bone and sew the wound closed at the stitches, and care for it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Heavy hanging mouths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	It never occurs elsewhere than in the womb and not anywhere else, and it is an illness called 'funge' because of its resemblance to fungus, and has subtle roots, and the stem large; and there are small ones as well as very large.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	the t.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I made the cuts and found in one 18 oz. piece, and in the other 5 oz., with the incision so that you look to see if the patient is damp, and the color of the sinew is bluish and moist with a delicate root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the cut reaches the sternum, and be present with you the fire cautery. For at the chest comes many times excessive blood loss, and if it does not stop, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the sinew as we have said, and let it be for 2 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restraint is applied, and one must continue to strain the thread until it reaches the elbow joint, which causes some effort; and if the roots are thick, be wary of the copper strip for the abdomen, but you must also properly apply copper on the majority.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then you must cauterize so it does not return; then treat the wound and ensure that the nerve which is of a sickly color, poor sense, and watery appearance is not coppered.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an advanced syphilis, and I will treat the chancroid hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the mouth jaw is injured
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the jaw comes from a wound or puncture by an abscess, and is located on the belly and in certain veins, as it occurs in other situations, or blood flowing from vessels or arteries according to what is seen beforehand, or swelling.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the abscess' rupture and the discharge of pus, then the appearance of the lesion resembles the body's natural color, and is an easy thing with no pain but has various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed at its limits, it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance it may be swollen, and greatly enlarges the entrance to the bath and for vigorous work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	If it is due to moisture, it's a light matter, and easily opened when you press with your hand without constraint. And if it's for blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, and protrudes in accordance with its quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's for inflammation, then it is sensitive to touching, and the wound heals as you observe whether its appearance suggests blood from an artery or vein, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary to let the wound remain open. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is of the intestines or bowels, it is necessary to instruct the patient to dip their armpit in something and extend it straight up, then secure it all around with a bandage.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then command them to lie supine between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the area you have secured with all the bandages.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Next, stretch the small abscess above along the entire large splint.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then secure it with a strong thread or cord of sturdy silk tightly, and let the knot be firm.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	the they are in the boile by ones:
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the ligament, then dislocate it, and place the intestines back into their proper position within the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	If you find it swollen, take hold of its tail, and cut away any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	If the artery behaves contrary or pulsates, and it goes away entirely, then return to your original work and take two needles, and insert two thin threads with them, and place the two needles around where you made a cross that you pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	if c; And saym: "L'sue : sighte the; they bone ;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When you encounter a wound that is subtle and piercing, then treat it as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the area as needed, and sew it closed.
dou chancre	On the ulceration
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of similarities to ulcers and how one should work with medicines, and how one should apply a heating cure; and let us speak of ulcers that originate in bones, requiring great caution for treatment, and according to the ancients, when ulcers are present or can be reached as if they were sores under the armpit, groin, buttocks, and must be completely removed at their onset; and when they are large and old, it is not advisam to approach them, for I have never seen one healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations when present and can be removed as we have said are to purge the patient of black bile once; then make them fasting if they show manifest repletion, prepare a clean location for the operation; then apply your ointment or ulcer, and cover all with wax, leaving no part exposed; let blood clot fully, squeeze well at the site in your hand or on any object, and if bleeding occurs opposite to the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the vessel is sealed; then perform another treatment as long as it remains healthy.
de ydropisie	And for dropsy, which means edema due to fluid retention in the body, causing swelling: apply a concoction of rosen with roses and ointment and pour on l'estuin, et les eaux; puis giete li detergens le morsel de l'eau-lui.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have discussed in the section the similarities of dropsy, how the assembly of water is formed, signs of each similarity, treatment by medicines and that which is cured by iron; only these two are exclusively separated. One must not touch with iron in either of these two similarities: namely tympanitis and hyposarcoma, for it's a deadly matter; therefore when you treat this dropsy similarity called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropscu; as usual and in matters of stomach solutions and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there's doubt; and if you see a strong patient solely afflicted by dropsy, neither too young nor old, then treat thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lay the patient upright with your hands under his belly and instruct the assistant to press the abdomen gently pushing the water towards the lowest part of the pelvis, then take a spatula made according to this form: And it should be sharp at two ends. However, do not make it so pointed that when inserted it can reach the intestines or cause bleeding;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	In the uuele de lis poignie est droit. Si tu les .i doi les deux ceste coustitute la droitièsliens, si soit droites et li dois eest les s’en tost, puis les maladies le croist, se nuisso:
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and inflate it, then lift your hand to cover all of the swollen area between the skin and fascia just as in scraping by the thickness of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the fascia until the swelling reaches its proper place, which is where the water resides, then insert this instrument whose form consists: It is similar to an extremely thin silver chain, made of silk or light linen, and in the part below it has a small hole; when laid on one side there are three holes; two on the other side, and one more; its head is cut as if with a quill pen, which is how scribes fashion their quills.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top above is where the vessel lies, so when blood flow reaches the water, release now onto the instrument; then empty either half or a third of it because if you empty more than necessary at that time, there's a chance the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, causing him to sweat heavily or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then the patient is suffering severely from water, and if you see, so you remove a small quantity. Then do with this instrument another day.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	On this day and every other, avoid overexertion until it remains; but give it a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave out too much water, cure with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and sunlight; and color with drinks; and cure with medicines that dry up until they are healthy again, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	From the impotence of the male member
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	There are no children born who do not have a foreskin on the penis, or if the foreskin is small, or it is not in its proper place. If necessary to perform this promptly: then provide him with a very fine thread-like cord and tie his foreskin so, and leave it as such for three days or four; and when he needs to urinate, remove the knot, and let him urinate, and then redo it; but perhaps there is no need, because the urine that comes forth does not close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those with a hernia whose head is small shall be treated by the method of pressure on the loin, as we have said, it will expand. Those who do not have the hernia in its proper place are fixed, for no one can develop having the hernia at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until their penis is raised; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and it is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of operation is that the patient lies with their back upwards, and raises the head of the penis and covers it as if they were holding a pin, so that the hernia may fall inside; and protect against blood loss which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a ligature to stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Of pus from the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these bubbles come in the vein, and it is an ugly appearance of a wart; and there are both malignant and benign ones; so you must pluck them with a fine needle, and excise and clean thoroughly, then place cotton pads moistened with Egyptian ointment; then treat with refined oil until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bubbles are malignant, of foul color and oozing, then you must treat with fire-cautery. After excision, and if the bubbles are inside both hairs and skin, partially, it is necessary to remove the one inside first; and once healed, care for the outside. For when treating them together, it is not certain that the head of the vein will be unharmed so blackness and decay may occur there as well; therefore, address all that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a poultice made from honey and ground almond shells, then treat with other remedies until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cauterization in this way: The cauterization helps with two purposes together: for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the vein is retracted and decayed, it must be that you tie or pull out hairs from the genital area, and urinate on the patient during excretions; and when the hairs are long at the top of the genital area which happens in those who have not been circumcised, or if there is a wound or abscess, so it must be that you scrape with an instrument, until the ligatures are untied, and the head of the penis is relieved.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then you must scrape with a spatula just the tip of the penis and hair; then carefully separate them, and put a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water over it, ensuring it does not dry out completely.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a discontinuation of wounds like the others; however, when we perform this work by our own will, especially in children, it must be done as well and with the best possible method that is beneficial for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice childhood circumcision, for it is not done in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have sought the majority of masters and scholars who practiced circumcision within one day, and with force, and all newborns; it was common because there were two stages, sometimes performing one above and leaving the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	But it results in doubled pain and the cleaning of the newborn is not assured at all; and often during fingernail care, escapes happen with the knife, which may harm the flesh, and wounds can occur as such that there's no need for further cleansing and I have observed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the immobilization made by force throughout the entire limb, I have found from experimentation that it is beneficial, as the forces cut equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, cut evenly on the entire sole tense; but ensure that the thread is properly straight around the skin; and make it in such a way as if instructing a child, if they understand, to only tie the thread around the penis for some time, then allow them to move freely in all manners you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make the thread stand straight between your hands, and let it be pulled taut on either side of your fingers so that the child does not see any strands; then press with your hand onto the penis and blow or cure until its head is raised completely; then cleanse thoroughly of all filth accumulated there, then tie the knot of a double thread, then secure from one end to another side by the link. And hold it as if on two pillars at the pouchet (foreskin) and the glans, with the thread between these links; lift gently but firmly and pull up the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then allow the blood to flow little by little, for it is a sign of healing; and apply powder on and over it, a dressing bound with a cloth from one-half of an egg boiled with rose water diluted in warm water, beaten with good quality fresh oil, and leave it until the next day, treating as necessary until healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	If the force of healing is this: both sides of the chin are held and sharp, and the chin is as large as a fingernail equally on all sides.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	If the error of healing is when the kernel escapes through the incision; therefore it must be extended to your fingernail, so that the left causes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, then use tweezeburners, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If they persist for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be left until the inflammation has subsided somewhat, and lightly scrape it; then move as you wish, but protect the area of the rod, as it will neither harm nor benefit.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus treat the sudden wounds with powder that we have previously discussed regarding powders, and if it covers too much skin and spreads upward, do not harm it; treat as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is due to inflammation of the kidneys, or frozen blood, or bowel, or swelling caused by similar things that we have discussed in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not flowing, and you see retention due to kidney enlargement or urethral obstruction at the bladwart's neck, it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; place their feet on the backrest, extend their abdomen upward from below the back, and restrain the patient as much as possible. Then the bladder ducts are forced to express urine above by doing so, which allows the urine flow again.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a "syringe", which is this shape: made of fine silver wire, like bird feathers; and its tube should be one palm's length and half again, and finely at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	The manner of urine flow release is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to the tip of some wool or cotton, then insert the head into the syringe through the thread; trim off excess wool and fit it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and almond oil, and have the patient sit on a stool, then apply urine oil, olive oil, and water tears to the bladder and penis.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis up to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladaderivate until it is empty, and this is not done in accordance with this order unless for the reason that the conduit twists as it goes; then extend the thread to remove all wool little by little, and urine follows along the thread, then extract it, and collect the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue inserting the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and make the patient relaxed.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction is present therein, and you see to distill waters and medicines, make use of the entire instrument called "clyster," which is thus formed:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and has .iii. valves: two on one side, and one on the other as you see fit; and the outlet hole where the medicinal substance comes out well enough to allow for evacuation of humors, and expelling when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	s.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of subtle suppositories, which are used to treat the bladder: so it is here.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher up; and from one side or the other breast the ligaments tear. Then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture intended for suppositories to treat the bladaderenewel the two breasts with a good double thread of silk, then warm the paste on fire; then insert the head of the suppository into the rod, then squeeze your hand over the bladder until all the moisture reaches it when the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, pierce roundly through; then insert a strong thread into these holes, assemble the circle as one would with a saddle, and put inside what oil, moisture, and water you wish to use, and tie it up with an instrument; do so as if you had made it from the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the vessel.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the division the methods of stone removal and extraction with medicines; and we have mentioned the difference between a stone formed by grains, and all the signs, and where one must work on a stone's size reduction; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will now tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stones formed in the bladebe occur more often in children, and it is a sign that the water of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety; and they are sandy, and gritty, causing discomfort to their penises, and making them urinate many times, then retracting; and with much frequency there are such movements; and it is easy for children until they reach four years old, but it is very severe in the elderly, and moderate for those who are between youth and age; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	When we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema in order to clear all waste from the intestines, for at times there may be obstruction requiring the stone to pass.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by hand, stand them up and move from side to side, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladard, and it never comes back up high. Next, make him sit between your hands properly arranged, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined downward; then grasp and touch its ends.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in its place, hurry to remove it immediately from there. And if it does not pass easily with all your efforts, grease your left index finger with oil, whether the patient is a child or youthful, depending on their age; and push into its base, grasp the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, insert it towards the neck of the bladder; then press upward from your finger, and expel it where you see fit.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and he commands that with his right hand he extends the joints upwards, and with his left hand he removes the skin below the joint in the area where they make an incision; then he inserts a filling spatula, which gives it its shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And they create a space between the joints and the foundation, not inside but along the left edge of the nail; and it is right under the stone, with your fingers close to or on top of the foundation, shaping the incision so that it is wide at the bottom and narrow within, depending on the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Occasionally press the joints that are near or atop the foundation until they protrude without effort; and know that there is sometimes a stone with corners or edges: if it is easy to remove; and if there is one like glue, smooth and round, where the evacuation is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	In the cavity where there are angles and edges, make the opening larger; and if it does not widen, you must use a tool like a file at the head, to stretch out the piercing so that it cannot slip out; or strike underneath with a subtle instrument bent over; and if you cannot manage this way, broaden a small hole somewhat, and if there is no skin covering, strain it using vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one piercing, first remove the largest at the bladder neck, then cope (cut) beneath, then the trite (small bones), and any others after that. If they are very large, it is better to make a larger wound, because two things can happen to the patient: he may die or urine will come through where the wound cannot be sutured; however, do your best with milking or using pliers on the tenailles (small hooks), until you extract them piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And once you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon'amoil (dragon's blood), and bind it tightly, and place a moilliet (bandage) soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water to cool down the abscess; then reassure the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you reset it, raise the area well with oil and water, then treat with the ointment diafiniticum and basilicon until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if an abscess comes in the wound and pus buildup, and blood congeals in the bladder causing urine retention (known as a certain manner where it cannot pass with the urine): therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if any remains, it will corrupt the bladaderen and cause inflammation.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then cleanse the wound with water and alcohol and vinegar, treating it in every way you can until healed; and ensure all bandages used to treat him are tied around both thighs and that remedies be applied at the site of injury.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	If the stone is small and located in the urethra and inserted deep within, and urine cannot pass; treat as I have described previously, by dilating multiple times with this procedure. I have experienced it thusly.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron bar in the following shape and make it at three sharp points like stakes:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and wrap it around the urethra below the stone: if it cannot come back into the bladero, gently insert the iron rod into the urethra until it reaches the stone; then turn the rod slowly with your hand on the part that remains in the urethra inside the stone. The urine will flow shortly afterward; press down where the remnants of the stone are still lodged within the urethra. It will be broken apart swiftly, and it will shoot out along with the urine, and is healed for the afflicted.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do so due to any obstacle, then take a thread behind the stone and another on top, then bend the rod at the spot between the two threads, then pull out the stone forcefully, release the ligament, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	From the stones of women (referring to uterine stones or fibroids)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There are times when stones occur in women (referring to uterine stones or fibroidangs), and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and another reason is that they cannot find a woman who knows well how to undress before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that sometimes one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's womb is more embedded than the man's, so it requires deeper cutting, causing great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to do so, one should find a skilled midwife and pay her well for the work, and if you cannot find one, then seek an exceptionally skilled expert in women's health or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she perform what you instruct regarding the stone removal.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and examine carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her hand or foot on the ground to search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it down from its position, and command that she puts her hand or touches the patient with her left hand firmly over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If it is twisted, one must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder to above, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then place a support under the stone at the hip joint opposite the side where it has moved irregularly, and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move its knee over or below the stone, and stabilize with your hand on the first small movement.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then pour on the stake in the thigh, if you feel the stone and can expose the wound so that the stone may come out forcefully; be aware there are many types of stones: they can be small or large, sharp or smooth, long or round, with groovebut know their similarities for understanding their exit.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the stone does not move, put powdered vitriol on it and let it sit for an hour until it loosens; then return to your task, until the stone is loose, and have compresses that I have instructed in the extraction of stones at home to assist you with your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the blood does not stop, and it is from an artery that has been severed, then apply powder at the site and compress with tapes and bandages, without restarting bleeding, and do not pull on any wound fragments unless necessary as the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb restored, return to your work until the bone is strong.
de hernie carnouse	Regarding inguinal hernias.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Gathering moisture is nothing but an assembly of dampness or pus, which emerges from under the skin near the joints and contains fat; it is called "pus," and never properly in the tissue of the fat, for if one thinks it's a different fluid, that isn't the case; and this is the leather of the fat around the bones we have mentioned; and such occurrences are not rare.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this pus is due to weakness in the joints, and it spreads that material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it never comes from hitting the joints, and this dampness has many colors: sometimes it turns yellowish, or is without red color, or black, or white like water, and such cases are more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	These are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is white and foul as we have said, then the boils are many, that is, long like an egg's shape, and do not break the veins, for they are entirely dampened.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	If it has moisture in the proper cloth, then there are many boils with part of an egg, and so one thinks they are another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the foul white, if it smells well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, you should examine all thoroughly, as to why its form was like this beforehand.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy as much as possible and have fullness of body; then place them on their back on something slightly raised, and cover generously with linens.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then lean to their left side, and command the assistant that they sit on their right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs at the front edge of the loins;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	by the s.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the thigh completely with water through one large hole, and drain all the water, then put in the onions, and stretch the skin upward; but do not touch the core of the bones, only the flesh. Skin it either whole or in pieces carefully as well as possible, if you do not cut neatly, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the joint pops back during your work, when you have completed on the thigh, then join the two halves of the bone core with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the joint affected by another disease, it is necessary to bind the veins that are hanging, suspecting the discharge of blood; then cut the bone at all the suspenders, and extract the joint, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the bone is joined in two parts together, know that these are two branches; bind the other part as you did the first equally, then drain the blood, and apply a linen bandage soaked in rose oil to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and apply another linen bandage soaked in wine and oil, and place on the two joints, and cover with doubled cloths, securing them together according to this method.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths and fill them with shredded linen as per this pattern, sew them together at the groin of the trousers, and one head goes to the foundation up to the back, and the other to the part near the wrist. The second set covers both elbows, all assembled, then tied in a loop with a belt.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	Et at no time is this branch of fire cautery in place without a knife made of iron, and you must take a fine needle-like caustic, and cover the leather thongs, and it should be soaked as we have said, that the white sack containing water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the caustic according to this method and pierce that white sac at its veins, and rub it with this hot fine caustic.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cover in all ways that you can, until you have rubbed it thoroughly; and keep the flame from touching the skin; and know that this work is more healing; and with careful regard to bleeding, and avoiding complications of cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if any other thing occurs such as an abscess or bleeding or something else, treat the matter that causes contradiction according to what has been previously said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this treatment because of its severity, then perform a perforation as I have instructed you; and it should be that when you are well certain by the meanings we have stated, you reset.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	if you make the patient lie down on their back with elevated legs; then incise the abscess below all tissue wide, and place the perforation deep into the body; and let the edges be large so that water flows freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton at the site, bind it, and leave for proper drainage of any remaining water, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the bandage does not allow water to drain out of the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or instrument used for draining pus in hydropathic cases as described above; and open a small portion of the wound so that the fluid returns, reassembling after 3 months or sooner, and once assembled again as before, this will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	For abscesses in glans penis
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	In this part of the branch on fearful conditions, I believe it is best to let them heal.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I shall tell you about the work and similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the thighs; and this is very common.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	said of lesse c's l’le tile ben craabitat ce le sfe la Mits the vjn; that way they dont. If you.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	The color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it may be a frightening and painful abscess, with a fiery color, and never comes from our arteries or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from us, [the physician], the abscess can be known by its hot disposition when pressed with one's thumb.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	as est par:t s n:
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	He who is afflicted with vein swelling is known by his tendency to react at the touch of fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can well make an incision in this manner, as well as on other parts;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you may cut out the core of the kidneys, then extract the fat to the top, and the fibrous tissue as white; remove the sutures from all parts of the organ.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	by, if he:n f with n, and sofa. EST m, that is to ce t, or theyt the glose la combs suscept (or lel : s, but weitherle; you maye onze are all s. I, for a it’s d, just as an untttest the same line:
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If it is near the liver or within what is inside the vessels, you must thoroughly empty it and roundly wrap the corpse.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of a stone is there, you must completely cover it and extract the calculus as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are finished, dress the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other salves until it is well again.
de l’aposteme des coions	s; If you give me. Est acpleez:Cole tad that la crot et les ben :l's (prie 1.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling that of a joint, with the softening of ligaments
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and it moves quickly causing pain to the patient when touched.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and its treatment is just as fraugturous as this one before it.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	the w ougue s dissections of a;
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary to make the patient sit on a raised seat, then tie the sling with cords around your shoulders.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	For all the vessel which is near to the thigh, and ties the master's bandage, and extends it properly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut with a sharp scalpel wide across where the vessels are, until they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	by n's
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle where it is, with a double thread, and attach it at the initial location where the vein appeared, and securely fasten to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then apply bandages straight along the length of the body, according to its size, and treat corrupted moisture spots;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as you would with others or an arrow wound, ensuring that no bandage slips off and loosens one of the joints.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	s;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the ear loses its hearing due to the incision of vessels, and drying up and cannot be aided.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the treatment for scrofula
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The remedies for this shrub are by the cutting that comes or scrofula, or the extension on the stomach in the groin area, so that the intestines descend from that inflammation to one of the legs;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	the ph.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And when it is of extension due to a boil, so it happens little by little over long periods, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it is equal swelling towards the beginning due to the intestines being hurried by the boil.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of division due to a boil, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse appearances appear from near the skin and it's for the exit of the intestines and the body affected by the boil.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	At no time do they tie the intestines with cords, and are kept thus; it causes great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron that cause fear, one must take care to remove them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of this surgery is that you command the patient to manually remove the intestines into the wound if possible.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	by and de m 90 (e present the gardder Mar:
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then extend the head above it, and cover all the skin over the joints with long cloth.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert into the waist hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the bones can be pierced.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the fascia which is below the skin of the joints, as long as the white flesh layer is entirely revealed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	le c; and it la. The ous they should not so far the patiente; the r them; this line: Do you to g s that he:t is the bo :P. Jichossi said ou refl� J.-d, but none in the old.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And the one who is behind the head enters the second sac; and push with your right hand into the crown of the joints, and extend the white sac to above your left hand, and lift the head completely through all the sac toward the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the minister to extend the head upwards, and remove that which is behind the joint.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And approach your feet if there's intestine wrapped or hardened white sac found, and if you find anything, push it towards the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine strands, and insert it into the rear part near the sacking, which is after the leather of the coat-tails; then cut the threads that appear from the strands, as long as there are four strands.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a cross pattern and tie the sacking, which we have said is below the leather of the coat-tails, with two strong knots.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the strands around the hairs and tie them with two knots so that no insect can enter in to feed on it, lest an abscess forms.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And immediately apply the ligature according to the first bone length, and after these two bones, leave out the sack which is below the corner of the collarbone as large as a thumb.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And then the rest according to the curvature that the upper arm bears; next cut in the part which is below the edge of the collarbone, as straight as possible and the bow, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then prepare a soft poultice with oil, and apply it to the wounds, and adjust the ligature as we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the facial swelling cauterized as we have mentioned, after incision, due to concern for blood flow disruption.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens and leaves the wound open until it heals by itself; and if it takes too long to do so, use warm water as we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other care, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of a groin hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	: curie l'oeil li lec. Li the n’esprentiel. So may beque it s uistressé la est quarte les arestreliez et maintissans, oriz qui tu estu, ou rance de lie.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then dress the wound and treat the abscess from which it works, until the hairs fall out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Never does there come rupture in the ankles, as we have said, and open the veins; and do not let any of the intestines escape through the joints, and if they do escape, it is slight, and heals quickly.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And always if it remains too long in this place, it becomes a fistula or hernia, until the intestines escape.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	This happens by the stretching of the sinew which is at the angle, as we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes softened and inflamed with an opening.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the healing is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and it has never been treated with iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And the patient lies supine on their back between your hands, then wrap the inflamed foreskin with a cloth as wide as three ells (about 3 meters).
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And presses at the front of the belly, then hold the two appearing eyes on either side of the sack above the head and each one in turn.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the rectum and do not cover the sack nor extend the uvula or anything else as I have shown you in the treatment of rectal prolapse.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then proceed with wound healing. And when you clean the children, if they defecate and heal the wound until it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is swollen, with no appearance in the wound, and the fire cautery moves easily at this spot, bringing more healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	For softening of the hardened skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin around joints is softened in some men, because the strings within are moisturized and transparent; and it's necessary when one wants to treat them, that the patient lies on their back with the affected side up, and covers the moistened skin over the natural skin. Then join the two edges together with a stitch, so you see the first excess of the softened skin at three or four firmly placed stitches; then sew between the stitches like other wounds until they are healed, and let them bleed slightly.
dou chastrement	By burning method
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The translation of the text is:
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites are individuals who possess both male and female reproductive organs or traits. This condition can be referred to as true hermaphroditism when an individual has ovarian and testicular tissues, which may be separate or combined in a gonad known as an ovotestis. False hermaphroditism occurs when there is the presence of only one type of reproductive organ along with secondary characteristics of the other sex.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	There are two ways in humans: one where between the two genders they appear as much like a woman's nature, having hair and sometimes passing urine; and the other way is in women, with a clitoris and two nipples. The treatment for men and women should be to drain all accumulated fluids, and treat them just like other wounds; but in the second manner, for men whose urine leaks through the skin of the testicles, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	Of the lice-bringing
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigene is a hardened accumulation on the body'cuits that are unsightly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment. You should scrape off excess tentigene with your hands or fingernails gently; but do not dig too deep, lest bleeding occurs, then treat it further until healed; and if another accumulation appears on the inside of lips and mouth, which may even burst out forcefully, resembling a wart, and thus they called it in ancient times "cowpox." If necessary, you should scrape it off as we have said with tentigene and treat until healed.
de erratique	Of rocky terrain
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic if the nature of women is not well understood, or if the passage is small; and it originates by birth, or occurs due to illness that arrives there; or it's caused by an animal bite, either a subtle snakebite or poison, and forms immediately on limbs, sides, back, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and sometimes the ability to have children; knowledge of this comes from observing the woman. If swelling appears imminent, do not delay with either both hands or a stick. If it is a subtle snakebite, and there are two marks, act quickly: place your index fingers together, and position the woman on her back with legs spread; then extend your fingers fully until the venomous effects subside, and apply to the swelling. Then take wool, scour it in oil, and apply it above the bite; keep dressing the woman daily so that she cannot move. And if the snakebite is hard and poisoned, you must cut a leaf of myrtle as a bandage. If the swelling occurs from an animal's bite, bind with lime paste and honey; and apply healing salves like dragon blood, frankincense, abundant in oil; then prepare a large gauze so that the wound cannot seal over; keep it on for a long time, and later bandage with linen thread. Continue other treatments until healed. And when bitten by an animal in the limbs, cover accordingly unless there are infected boils. Because to touch an inflamed boil that is swoln requires no interference.
des emorroides	Emotions often involve feelings of discomfort or distress related to situations affecting one's internal state and external conditions; in the case of hemorrhoids, it concerns painful swelling around the anus due to vein inflammation.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Swollen veins often arise without usual practice, and when they become old, they transform into hardened masses; and we have previously discussed their types, signs, and indications of treatment in division. I state that swollen veins and the resulting lumps, when fully within the intestines and not detectable by touch, can only be cured with iron. Those that are at the mouth of the anus can be felt and thus treated. Therefore, one should place the woman in a cold house, then extend the swolebeam with tongs, and apply substances to its roots that restrict blood flow, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and other similar things; afterward, soak her feet in warm water for an hour, and then place her in cold water. If bleeding subsides, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate rinds, gallnuts, and other related items, and then prepare a paste from barley flour mixed with honey and egg yolk, and apply it as an ointment to her back. If this works well, that is good; if not, apply wet pads of animal bladder or wool at the buttocks without using iron; then take linen soaked in plantain juice or agletjuice with wine must, and apply it there. And once the abscess heals, treat the area with ointment until it is healthy again; if called "albathir" (red), the skin appears rough like a head of an arrowhead, so cover it as previously described for treating hardened masses; then continue treatment until it is healthy again.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the rectum
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	turtiant t oze ce:s0 the masaint :e that isne fait il’scolstresf!dous sallIse ntostrabletr;mist alentiertable m ieder (syta they, andcha mancie crost.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The first thing in childbirth is to know the natural shape of labor and the signs when you see a woman straining with exhalations; then hurry for the baby to be born; thus, if you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the baby may come out soon. When he comes down on his head, the second follows him too; and because of this, there will be good cleansing of all impureby nature. However, those who come in any other way do not come naturally. This sometimes occurs on its feet, and it is stronger either to the body or the neck, and may change by chance to another malicious form. It is necessary for delivery that she be wise and subtle about these things, avoiding mistakes and deceit; I will show you all the figures of how one should help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes down naturally on his head and the woman labors strongly, but her strength is weakened, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; prepare its natural oil or fenugreek to be cooked, and then place it between its thighs with a small suppository of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Cut the second rib, and push it back until the moisture inside is pushed out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, one must administer an enema to the woman using a mixture of musk and fenugreek with oil from sesame seeds; then release her grip and induce coughing for an hour: now deliver the child. And if both hands come out forcefully, one should guide them back slowly but surely; and if they cannot be guided in, put the woman on a stool, and raise her feet upwards; then stand the stool on the ground and lean over it so she does not strain to stand upright; and if the child cannot be delivered despite this, clamp the hands with forceps placed here beforehand, extract the child, and gently pull.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From underneebore a childe on hise feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child is born, one must place it upright.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it little by little until they are even.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	"Then translate it is the finalize; and then izzaray be translated into English language thee estent.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it reaches up to the thighs, then command to press, and there is sneezing due to condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it extends further, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not extend as we have said, if the turn is little and little, until it reaches its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	they can t. Slavage;
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come back as we have said, take horse-mullein of tall height, and oil for joints, and melted resin, and grind all in a single mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	And apply this oil according to the woman's disposition and urgency.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then place on until the ointments with them as necessary are.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	When it is softened from being out of place, you make a waxed splint and put it in position, leaving an hour for it to set.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then you have the child sit on a stool, then make them sneeze and hold their mouth and nose shut, and gently press their belly, as they will now wet themselves.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From under the child's knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	and the same le Oly: C'st S bontawir.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then soak it on its neck, and let the fingers hang below, and lie down on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And folds his hands little by little, and then presses the hands above the belly, and removes the pillows below until it is levelled downwards.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not move, then take his feet and wrap them firmly, then lift up the belly, then he presses with his hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And gently push the child little by little; and command the woman to ply until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the time of the child's birth, keep a hand on it as if widening its grasp
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer bringing back the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	de lief so please le peck;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If it cannot move, make it lie on a bed with its legs straightened out.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then treat the bruising as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then examine for restoring the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	nd ans they do n's s.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the dislocation of the child's head from its neck, with hands spread wide, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for you to dye the patient's hand, then slowly turn it a little, and wrap gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is evenly turned, place on the muscle-like membrane of pitch and oil as we have said, then command that she move a little at a time.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	by t.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner, every other time resetting
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it occurs in this manner every other time resetting, you should dress the wound on your finger until all moisture is gone.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	with: ougnaz, les poigné tres sont tous le s soigne li a toutes les l'oncle tous temps et healing the cous que il pas, de chier. En la pine enlors they are w peir est li vnt plus, ou.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then insert the child inside as much as you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then if you must gently move it slightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the release of splints.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Sores often occur many times, sometimes none in three or four; and it is not an extraordinary thing, and little happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two things are extraordinary: they do not live long if there are few cases.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this much too: that they multiply and can be driven away by the fleas who carry them, which is linked to leprosy.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	t' il c; s’s.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are sharply painful, follow the treatment as we have said, and let the skilled surgeon do it quickly and easily what needs to be done.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and thus make them move as is suitable for healing.
de plusors enfans	among several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	byul.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it is necessary for the barber to know all this, as sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	One should act according to what must be done.
de l’enfant mort	that dont the same leue doit li its time sofaire remedy; and his skillet or craft, he not can is a word, si come the after they are craft est et artiste with your art done
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman whose child is dead or stillborn, as I have said in the section, and there are no contractions, and you must proceed with handiwork.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is necessary to determine whether the woman is of sound health, and has not had an incident or fears dying;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is necessary that the woman be supine on her back, and have her head tilted downward, and legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	the le bord by following ; (and s cosse: se f cro pleli . I’sir arg;d;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the dislocated shoulder with oil from myrtle wool, sweet almond oil, and flaxseed; then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and these emollients.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then gently push into the joint; then secure it with a dressing or bandage as needed.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And be sure to watch if the child's head is enlarged that it does not descend upon its neck.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If the inflammation is present in its eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or below the beard or near the throat or close to the ribs.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if it is accompanied by swelling on its feet, either with a fever and mid-rib pain.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he dyes the inflammation on his right hand, places the corbeurre between the thumb of his left hand, and ties it with all his hand gently, and fixes the inflammation in any of these ways we have mentioned until it becomes empty.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	est;e : .
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert against one of the other corners or where you need to cut through, so that the extraction is equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend it equally by moving from one side to the other, so that it may come out, and have the corners sharpened for holding, as shown in its form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, apply oil to some of his wounds with a cloth, and pour it into that area, and treat the other area.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	contes la (et t1e; bo:
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, it cannot be brought back due to constriction.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if necessary, wrap around the area with a bandage until it heals completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then wrap it around the joint of the sole or at the back, so you must do this with your other hand and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and dislocated at birth, or has an open fontanelle,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if necessary, you should place a stick between your two thumbs, and gently lift the head while extracting the fontanelle.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	When you place it on the instrument called "almidaque", with which it forms along with strains or paste applied afterward.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And thus similarly make the child with great natural ease.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat them with sharp needles.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the head springs forth and is restrained by forceps, so it may be split until the moisture that has caused the issue is released.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be removed, cut into pieces as you are able to do so.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swolebound in the belly or off the ribs, one must pierce until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	Oudiez andre t (don; they same-Miel: Caufft the fact; endre.this c[at; If you not s. The oughts.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	If it is difficult to breathe on the belly or breast, one must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around by hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	If it causes bloating or breast pain until the moisture within is corrected;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if the other limb is affected by bone fracture, and the neck remains dislocated.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If the physician holds the base of the hand at the beginning of the forearm, and pulls up to the wrist crease.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then apply a cauterizing iron once or twice, and bind it tightly.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	And if the mouth of the tendon is retracted due to a hot abscess that has come upon it, there should be no need for labor.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Instead, one must administer moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	to the nt s them;
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	When the child is under its ribs, and you place it upright, follow what we have said in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there are no remedies available, you may treat the wound in parts, leaving nothing of the sinew.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And then it comes if is nains ou de euz si a c are you may take them and so much from the end of all as fret. Et tu le plusors, il tee et seiz et oniement qui l’on li pas.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if bleeding occurs from movement, it must be promptly stopped by tight restriction, along with other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman with the child in her womb dead, then buried one, and resurrected the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time an abscess came in his mouth, swelled so much that it burst, and began causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	the scaron; he lis, etc. If they gue tret; teli lesse t (c: icheys Droit line.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place on strong attraction, and from it comes an bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I am greatly troubled, for there is no bone in his belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were bones from a deceased child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	When I treat a wound, until its edges are smoothed over by touch.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman remained in such condition for long periods thusly, gradually returning to their original state.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not noted this treatise further because whenever the master encounters a strange thing, he knows how to address it properly.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	f s's unt:
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of the pressure, to which one fastens the books; and at two turning points are two heads of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Anyway, the horns be more subtle for restriction, and made from ivory or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the handle be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees one inch, and a length half a palm long;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And among the two limbs are two dislocations of the same kind, which should be secured on both sides, half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two dislocations are positioned in the mouth of the hamate to be opened when turning both corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood wood according to the resemblance of pincers.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	. That shed c�lsonde la*
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	When you see that the maris opens completely across all instruments, make the woman sit on a bed with her arms and legs outstretched.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then insert both supports together into the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument just above between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand all the way up the instrument, just like with pincers evenly, according to the quantity you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until it feels comfortable for her.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	man's: [velye (trag;k ; Mal and the old e se uch.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If do not disdain the instrument that you have prepared it, for its necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is fitting to command the patient to hold back her veil and then expel the amniotic fluid, with the hands restrained at mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	If it jumps as such, this is right.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make a lid or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the pestle, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, shepherd's purse, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a wick or lid on the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the pestle.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	DNus: the t’t aubon the 98 they words are c and sofews take on this they ou nonn.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If one strains the second rib jointly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, the nurse instructs to moisten her left hand with oil of cumin or high-quality musk, then apply it to the wound.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and if she wishes for the ribs; when found, gently pull and extend it slightly straight so that the bone does not come out during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	first by s. 1 n’t; Fait CMbo:n spalet. The bon lessele o; the c and so that est le t, withoutst, or la; Que a l's, which is it de the w, and the se ;
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the maris is stretched wide, we have said to treat by inducing sneezing and fumigating with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if you are of all that we have said, ensure that you do not stray from our advice.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary to take the one at the mouth of the gall bladwart, tie it to the thigh of the woman, then clysterize with ointment by the fourfold remedy.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it swells and returns to its place but still comes with a foul smell to the stomach and head, causing pain in the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If so, then smoke treatments from there are needed as follows: none of the old ones have tested smoke treatment with sorrel and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman to retain the flowering and secondary hairs is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it appears like a small vessel, with its top delicate in structure, and wide eyes above the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and is done the smoking over the coals, and the tine until it has burned out, then start anew with another one.
de percier lou fondement	Of dissecting the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	The child is born without having fully developed; instead, it has been pierced by subtle threads.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore the midwife must pierce the subtle thread at its right place and not with sharpness of the scissors, and ensure the dressing does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	a ne dont we have not:
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you suspect that it pops out again, then place or tie a bandage of cloth around it, and let it remain for several days until the child wishes to move in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And in no case does this condition of wound or abscess closure occur; if it is necessary to treat the closure: apply a bandage as previously mentioned with cloth.
de la fistule dou fondement	for the anus's hemorrhoid
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	; they havet a po ben that f.  (sce as good the following paragraph by. And also; scchous. There is a sst the clemente onse J; a la main; Mk; mjou; themd et so ou the fle;
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is an abscess or more; and if that swelling is old, then treat it, and ensure the dampness does not bring forth pus or subtle bowing.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these abscesses are not persistent; and known by what occurs or discharge in the patient's stool when they vomit, and sometimes in their urine.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are abscesses that perforate up to the bladder, and up to most of the penis; and reach the hip joint, and near our groin's crease.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one finds a persistent fistula at the base, not bleeding.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so you must insert your finger or base at the indication point and carefully place an acupuncture needle of silver or iron in the fistula, if there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is twisted gently touch the horse hairs, and you must carefully do not trim them down as close as possible until they are shaved.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	If you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or swelling or heat as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If it does not pierce, and you are in a hurry for the cure:
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	eisnt ce quater les que sont s;
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent comes near its place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twist and the wound of pain within, then it may be here bowed, and neither medicine nor bandaging with salve will help.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas there is no strong remedy but pain, and the vanity of foolish people who intervene with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	And because it happens by the nient semblant l'on est la poinçaille des nerfsont persaindul. Et pour ce nollesi:
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs angled towards their belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then place a tent of wool or cloth if there is any twisting until you are sure the tent is in place.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels discomfort at the base, it is appropriate that you insert your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and s they cjukd or.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If one does not skillfully treat it, there is no way to heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It can be done in any case that we may well heal anything, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that we provide is to use the subtle cautery according to the size of the abscess as previously mentioned.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then treat the bruised tendons with a poultice until they swell up, then apply an ointment to soothe and bind them.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, that's well. Since this, cannot be otherwise healed.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tendon is torn, and does not penetrate deeply to where it is anchored or foundation, and between your thumbs and the bandage, create a thick covering of cloth or silk, and look for the fistula that bursts through this coverage by its color.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	n:s'D:ndrian.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And will be relieved of pain, healing begins; then fashion those curved sticks that resemble a bird's feather, and keep none left behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal quickly, cut between you and the work, either fire-cauterized or medicated with a salve.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery gathers two things: that is to say, the hardening of those close-set bones and the coagulation of blood and expulsion of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	soint.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with soothing plasters of strong composition, and these are dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes to the very bottom of the foundation, and is distant from the body, you may strike either the knee or ankle joints with it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	; sir Consequently.
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	When you cauterize it as we have said, or cut to the bone, or if it heals and is treated as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too deep, lest you sever the structure that holds the foundation, and let evacuations come as they willingly flow.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then heal it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then fashion the false cartilage which is in the wound as you see fit.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound, and place the fistula in the part below the foundation; if it is more comfortable for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And never create fistulas in this manner: and it is where you tie the tent on the fistula, near the foundation below the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If you take a tent with a pierced top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert a twisted thread into two, and sew the tent with all the threads until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is torn at the edge near the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that pierced one so you can sew your two or foundations.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	the t ente bon à so cet and you;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And the bandage is never removed until the children have made these cuts which are between two pieces.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not burst, try to drain it in every way you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make a large incision if possible, but then the healing begins as we have said, until it is sound.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the surgery for the creation of a fistula involves being very sharp and pointed, partially cut and penetrating.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on another hand not, so that it does not cut as it should be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	the les su; if:s, howd. If yout f: bonge.
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	In many ways: some are within the foundation, like resin grains, and there are small and large ones, and in them is blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and some have one or more [grains], and they dislocate the foundation and the top of the foundation; but those that are displaced have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and in them there is some yellowish water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	The treatment for those who have them within the foundation involves instructing the patient to strain themselves to go to bed in chambers until their foundation becomes firm again and new hair appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are quick about it, shave the area with tweezers or at your fingernail, then cut close to its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the needles cannot be held due to their size, grasp them with a small cloth or cotton, or from a piece of muslin.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And remove the arrows from his legs, then wrap them, and powder with warm heated powders that are in place of fire cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you may cauterize them as the fire cautery chapter instructs, then heal with other remedies until they are healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter cleansing agent to cleanse what is at the base, so it may come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	the son:
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you grasp them with your fingernails or pliers, and bandage them; then treat them as we have said, until they are sound, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary to suture according to this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle; then run the thread through from above and make the needle pierce from another side, and turn the two edges of the thread away from the needer.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and make the thread straight; then tighten it firmly, knot the thread, remove the needle, and do so with all others, leaving one for tying off the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then apply to the base a drapery of wool soaked in oil or grease, and place it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let it remain until they fall off, and when they are shed, treat with ointment or other remedies, until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Also the seat of fibrous tissue or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often it happens sharply within the intestines, and by natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary to reset at the tip of a stump or over your nail's surface that does not allow for moistening.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it until it becomes dry as needed.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	the following:
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it becomes healthy again.
dou fremit	By a sudden blow
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A flea is a small creature with a forked appearance on the body, and it goes mostly unnoticed.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never brings coldness, but feels like deadly tremor, and comes to the entire body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	iste on:
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to the entire length of the phalange until you grasp it entirely with trembling and set it firmly in place, and secure the trembling at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make a splint from either wax or iron as shown here, and be subtle below and transparent above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not feel it with your hands, but hold and press them together; and if you see it, cauterize the trembling as shown here or using a fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	by pa l’sul:d sir toug. Et so ou n'estra;
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made was an enema of silver or brass, or melted lead or molten metal; and never made were these small and large suppositories according to the one for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Thus in the care of children who are weak and painful, they are small [suppositories].
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of enema small or large is as follows: the belly being tied in this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an abnormality or the belly is swollen, as you see, and the head pierced within; and on one side two holes, and on the other side one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and it may be that the belly or arm holds remedies from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and is pierced through all around by small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each hole there should be space, then insert a strong thread of twisted wire through them or around it, and shape the belly as one would with a kid's pouch.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	When the medicine is within, tie it with a strong thread at the end of an instrument, then enema; and it takes the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or goat's milk fat, or similar substance, then pour it in gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the minister spreads it with his two hands together until full, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient'cups legs towards him.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	byzze t (e, so they give.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer an enema in the case of intestinal issues, and the patient's health improves, as long as it remains so.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if hemorrhoids are found or an abscess occurs, give a subtle enema as to that of a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle enema by which the skin should be stretched.
des plaies	M, even you give them:
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In our discussion on wound care, we will now say about hand treatments and medicines according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the locations or the ways in which they are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made include piercing with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or by lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	est de l'suez.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head injuries, for memory shall come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is wholly torn and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and if you slightly suspect an abscess: if the heat of the scalp persists shortly from the blood of the wound, then place the saigner on the opposite side of the affected area.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And instruct the patient to have plenty of wine and hearty meats for relief.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not wish to fast, then lessen his meat intake and neither drink wine nor consume bread at meals.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And for the wound should be covered with a cotton soaked in oil, or use this salvesemant.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	If there is no abscess present, apply it to the wound if it is fresh and full of blood, and not moved by air or powder, which I will say more about shortly.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrow has been moved, apply certain ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar to it, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, join them with sutures as I will describe for abdominal wounds in stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone and shallow and held by little only with sutures, then dress it with medicinal salve, and restore hardened leather in its place.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Instruct the patient to eat large meats as tested and cooked wheat, similar to peas, and such things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or see putrefaction, and it does not reach the bone, suture completely, then pour on oil and treat.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without a cord, and it cannot be tied down by medicines, whatever the artery, and when you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help at all, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy; and it is that you apply this powder which soothes as much as the art allows.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	that n's
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And clean the wound, and tightly bind it, until it heals well and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then wrap it well, and allow it to feel unbinding, unless it swells; for we do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this should not be done by fire alone unless you have the incense or blood of a dragon; but that the art must heal the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved from its place, especially in this case, do not put any other of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But apply some digested ointments or wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it becomes soft.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat other ailments until they are healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture occurs with a small wound and you extract it using delicate tweezers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about these head fractures hereafter.
de la plaie dou col	From a wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and is simple, without a difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery are severed in the neck.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is veins, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment alone and not put anything restricting on them, for they harm the vessels and cause them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	ires is heal s asd.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	However, the medicines soaked in gentle water, as with calves washed in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled again in gently simmering water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other remedies prepared in this manner, and moistened unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch it and bind with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	de9 D.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	If an arrow is cut off, and bleeding begins to come, then treat the wound, bind it, and if necessary, cauterize.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	If a throat spine is cut off or the windpipe and nerves are guarded, preventing movement of flesh.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If there's a wound on the throat bone, don't touch the throat itself but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	by
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	If the wound has caused pressure on the bone, you must treat it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	If there are bone fragments, treat all that you can reach, and those you cannot retrieve; leave the wound until it scars.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let it be thoroughly cleaned and dried up completely;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder as I have mentioned above.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there are bones within the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound caused by a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a deep wound from a spear or knife, and the wound shows signs of infection with the patient becoming pale, then check if the wound is deadly serious; as soon as you see that the wound is severe.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	; do not. with ses:0; 1.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And returns to the body, causing pain to the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But I apply an attractive salve and bind it two times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you don't have a salve, then place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	Let the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If there will not come a spasm or severe shaking of the body or pulling of the neck.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the proper arrangements of bones, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	it ensure les fys. If there wast. Ensure as the following treat. And assaisse lits to the shoulder pain, and ligament leis:
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	If it cannot heal or work, then recognize that there is an abscess; if the treatment proceeds as it should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's straightforward or elsewhere on the back, then treat that which lies before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it's large, by stitching; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in bone, and there are broken bits of flesh, so treat the wound, and extract the shafts if they are protruded.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	Iimb; (c* ue:
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds of other limbs, there is judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	And rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The falling of the belly is great and medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the great wound never escapes any part of the intestine or its veins, why the introduction of pus.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	the wt les oint; can be done, for treatment of le c as are all de ou any: 1 sung:
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	By this one puts more pressure on the bowels inside, if they are not reset little by little.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	For this reason, the intestines swell quickly when feeling cold, so they push more forcefully.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And therefore the wounded flesh moves, for this is why one relocates the intestines to their original place among others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	t l’s (1 s; CLE met.
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common types of hernia occur in the groin area.
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and there are other types of wounds on the body, along with two more specific kinds of hernias related to those injuries.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And also they are especially associated with the groin wound; and I will explain each one and describe them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	by to as heu:
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And various methods are to reset, such as by one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	For due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said.
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because the intestines are swoln by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Wet one sponge or a piece of fine linen cloth only with water.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Ou est soule une esmie avec lement la de la ploigne un mette sui que vous puet chaud: the soient les ego is and other piece of cloth ou l’esp.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And inflammation of the intestine arises until it is swolebreathed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And never before made this vin straining, and is moved that may be blown open for swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation subsiding, take the intestines to be cooked in water or vinegar and well-done.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For this reason, its entrance is attached by a small thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, make a slight incision with the instrument used to treat bunions.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first remedy is to move that which is swolebound.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	but not so it ne:
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the swelling to split open:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If it cuts into the cavity without releasing, and see how it takes shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is expanded, and the intestines protrude forcefully,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If possible, for this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and it's on the part below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	If it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raise its legs higher than its head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the abdomen,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If you raise the head and buttocks higher than below parts,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	And so too if there is a protrusion in one of the two belly regions
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	Then you should ensure that the affected part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	or. The translation, and :
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds use what has been prepared for you
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then have at hand a minister of pity who will cover your entire wound with it.
et assemble les levres;	And gather the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And this is the common way of suturing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is necessary to take a needle or several, depending on the width of the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave two strips, and it is done with a stitch or several strands of thread are used.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two heads of the shoulder with the two ends of a saw;
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	that lies beneath the skin of the shoulder blade, until you make it pierce at that part;
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join together the two ends of the saw so they have four parts in total;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then stretch a piece of double thread through the eyelets of two parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then immediately assemble the two heads of the wound,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and leave them an inch apart, then insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	Then apply the thread carefully as you did with the first needle.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing so according to your need for more needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as the entire wound is held taut.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	And are needles of medium thickness, between fine and coarse.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles completely cover the wound, and those too thick cannot enter it well enough.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason they must be of medium size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	And it is not proper to push the needles too far from the edge of the bone or through the skin.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	So that they do not close and heal the wound before the fusion;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	Then wrap the head of the shoulder with bandages so they do not tighten and cause discomfort to the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And place bedsheets or cloths on the shoulders to keep them immobilized.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let it remain until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	For it holds a single needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second method of suturing is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And it is that you set the two heads of bone with their sockets together using one needle or a strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced all four pieces together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you thread the needle to the part where you began, in the manner of sewing cloth.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	the pere l's f cfla te que t sis les they
ceste costure sevent li home,	This suture lies upon him
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	And I sewed a wound of a man who had one belly.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was afflicted by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	the est lest s.
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	And it comes from two large intestinal folds,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And it was a wound within the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned his intestines after he had been for twenty-four hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	And it was a wound cauterized up to 15 days, and healed by the treatment, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician judged that they would die, but it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure them with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	theyre a  they c, i wonder; please :
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now you shall hear of the two proper ways to bind wounds:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and thread it through the part forward until its inner depths.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when she has pierced the core straight on, place the head of the needle or stitch where you have threaded the needer.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	de: and lits any bones que they way:
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	And the understanding of this suture is to hold it as a furrier makes furs.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And let it lie on one side, and return to its completion at another, until the suture is fully complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of suture, as Galen properly states,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If it is as one would find with any wound that naturally brings together both parts,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and they apply the upper part to the lower head in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Pierce a needle or stitch near the wound site, and make an incision there solely.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And leave both sides of the sacrum;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle and make an incision downward to its end within.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make an incision in both the part forward to that depth within, at two other shoulders opposite each other.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the manner of suture and it is most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says this word, and no one attests to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must push a needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And strains that when the rupture is amidst the stomach,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If the wound is more severe than others of the belly,
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	c;
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	When you find the fresh wound still bleeding, thus making the arrow move.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If you reposition the intestines, and their openings; then put on powdered lead-based medication.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	If it has moved again, then place on any ointment that is available, until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and bind the thread, and ensure the dressing is tightened, and the mirrors (to reflect light for inspection).
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would with others, until it heals.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	;'s i that the f.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move two times a day until it is set right.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in certain cases when the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound affects the main members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	by.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And place it between the angles, and under the supports;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if he feels pain or swelling in bulk, which often occurs.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If the black wine enemas are tepid, and especially when the swelling reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	; cannot be the b n's:
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are diseased.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is due to the expansion of veins which occur therein, and by the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity to its natural nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the spleen falls out from the wound, put it back as with the intestines while still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	that lais ee c. nd the boele line.s they say; ift; If it've and f. And so:zle t; prForceze de la mortlé de le dit. The purpose asjour.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then treat what is between the ligaments.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Herein the procession and then treatments, de l'airies to le sengne que ce cire pours a la poilz est duleuze que il lemei les riz à qui alit par les cuerdans, le chertailes au qillies les.
de la routure dou boueil	From the treatment of the eyelid
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are inflamed, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored in some patients,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	aum:
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	And there was a wound on the right side of the abdomen,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and was perforated, becoming a fistula, causing effusion and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I provided care according to what I could, continuously draining until healed, and the lice were extinguished.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him bound, I doubted the patient had harm in his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no pain, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and the experimentalists said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	s. Se d;
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	When the tremor has opened the mouth, place it between the two lips.
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	If the tremor draws out its mouth underneath;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	And then you shall tie his head, so that it cannot be dislocated,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then apply another warmth afterwards as before, until the wound is fully healed.
et cout la plaie.	And cover the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If such a headache occurs in the intestines, and brings no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	byt s iste: m; a they are that n’s as far
en teil maniere:	When by any means:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this intestinal string which is thoroughly cleaned,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the end of this string a fine twisted flax thread,.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitching up wounds is not deviated from the path of trust and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, but require subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Regarding a fistula, or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	the they s (t; that is too much.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	When it arises and becomes bent again.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is due to improper vein formation hard and pale, where there is no pain felt.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it appears as if plucked like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	de la pe Pesixt that theyt; and m; Fat heu so s me; N's.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	At no time little, and at other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken in the section on wounds, that any wound not cleaned, and there is no healing;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is only due to one of these seven:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	by.
ou por sa malice;	Or due to its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there is hardness within it, and on the lips, do not allow it to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or because there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	by the an example f:
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	When medicines are not good for treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because corruption is a form of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	because the property in the region is of late digestion and delayed health, and flees by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	When there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula made by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	should they have them.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	For there are fistulas which come from major veins, and arteries, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or to the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	byr angt ou f: CZlfors fait li k; se carti m t in dur:
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, with only hard work and ignorance involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is no fistula that reaches the level I have mentioned, and you are confident in the healing.
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if you know it well, then take a tent of flax or iron cloth, if the fistula is straight and you want to. (The translation provided here may need adjustments for clarity as "se li fistule est droite" seems awkward in English.)
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	the old with n'the ons. The end:
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	When the flesh sags, it bends around its twistedness.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if there is an abscess on the hands with holes through which you cannot well search by probing,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if the cleansing comes out through one of the holes,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and li that you are they are not s, too: ould heal: so:
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then firmly hold it with your power so you can determine if there is bone or nerve, and the vein has burst.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient to describe the pain felt upon pressure of your hand, and where it is located.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	et he agrelt. Thet; s the c C'the se: DCC; If you say they paragraph; che Court-Mud in iste so as v or ben:
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And bone is the shoulder blade and corrupted joints which are within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	In these it be reset they soint recouvrir the li estraints sont parle sont recouvert de cuentre eux que ils soient recouvert de peautre eulz sont traction jusqu’il sont recouvert les estrainte de peurquels puis il sont tous eulx sont sont quits recouvert;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	If the fistula is well situated on the right side, it is proper to cut into it as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then I put wet bandages in medicinal water, and raise it up to the top of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	Apply the healed until fully as you see on the head of the wound so that you can put ache, et sores and bandages are not be in wet. ici de bonty à l’aiues it with medicinal, but if les suture or is, ou est auge la pest ducte laite fistule, on to the wound so que you may medecine, et li plaie; sirop dure as much be heal.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then apply healing balms with spices of medicinal herbs until they are healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said before.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And of the wound so much, you as ours and such that, they are incisions avoit s'est a nous dous it is by fire-se puis qu’il ne puet en fuir par lignor he must be cauterized; et ce que les pains tans la.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves trouble you or principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, until the king's remedy makes all the decayed bone whole;
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Make it inté par le rottes est lore the same as of the same is.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if it is not secure, rejoin as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	It's necessary for you not to go further than the source of heat.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If it reveals and burns, stay as long as possible at its origin.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And remove all decay, then reset to its place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that's well done.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, understand that the decay is too severe, to which you cannot come;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	text they be it. The word:
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if there is a small deformed bone, and you pull it out with pincers.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If the extraction involves an instrument not suitable for this purpose, then...
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is any bone fractured, do not leave any piece behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	And if moisture causes the opposite effect, there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	What do not move te force the est l’osse pas isnté and so on le plusors; et stop until it has a long as nerves et by force d’e par la bone they are moved with force de par li ou paire, and se curate the c os avec force so that in the moiture: you.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them at once, place upon the wound something offensive-smelling to hasten healing.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it remain until it becomes tightly encased around the bones.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	then their bones will be more easily affected.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If there is such decay until the blackening becomes all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	Then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	If there is significant damage to the heart, it reaches up to the molar of the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it is necessary to sear and cover all the way up to the decay, then heal until it is solidified.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a case of a boil in his leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if that is an example and aid for your practice.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	the de lesne;
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As long as matters came to the leg, and was emitted from a large abscess, and had no reason for opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the healers by their madness worked so much on that they opened up the abscess.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and there was a lot of matter flowing out, and it became a fistula, and much puss came forth that all things within the body turned to boils and moisture.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	s il est not; t'e.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	While I have been called here, and seen his leg and the remedies with which he was treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what needed to be done through the pores for the whole body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red throughout the young man's body, and had a citrus color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	they are:
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that one part comes against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I pressed on it, and cut into the wound until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it rotten and pungent, and the decay reached to the inner side of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared to be a corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to heal the wound with powerful remedies for a long time, but could not unite it.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	is not prt.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	But I could not move it as much as within an inch of the bone, and the fracture extended all its length.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then reset with medications; and he was quickly cured and fastened securely.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it did not recur to the operation again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not bear it,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	lesst Chlor mid:
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For evacuating blood often makes him groan, but he was completely well.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And in the place of the bone there emerged a hard callus, and it was well-formed with no harm or disadvantage at all, neither upon awakening nor arising.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated as follows:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take one of them, and strain to the head of the bone where it opens.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct that none should stretch it upward;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another band of skin larger than the first one, and tie it over the flesh that is on the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	;
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And uncover the bone above the joint where you see it shiny, ensuring that the bone is not broken.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a splint or tablet below the bone to stabilize the damaged joint.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And wait as long as one can see and feel the decaying condition, and do it again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is within or on one part.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If you reveal the wound entirely; then place a piece of coal above it.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then move from one part to the other along the length of the corruption as we have said; for each segment should be long enough...
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and it s crovice. The cir they too much the f.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	When there is rupture along the two connected joints, there is no other remedy than with the cup.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	When rupture is at the finger of the hand or the toe of the foot, it is a very serious condition,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	Then, si cum suis ceste de la, and do soign.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in every manner you can, but let the vein or nerve not work against you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that incision and sutures for closing these bones are many, depending on the position of the bones and appearance of the skin.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their thickness and fineness, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason, one must equip oneself with instruments appropriate to each kind of procedure.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and you shall choose the tools that your work will show are needed, according to knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And he testifies to the signs of diseases through their manifestations.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you consider the instrument that is necessary according to what is appropriate for it,
dou feu	By fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder rotates or due to density or weakness.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have administered medicine for that deterioration with curative drugs, but they do not prove beneficial,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	by;s s: enl armise and so 1 no trapfi;dulx;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If the patient's pain leads to their passing by death or wickedness (evil), which is greater due to the defect of a limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the member turns black, as if it were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the blackness, then there follows decay of limb to limb.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	And if it is by the impact of venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar ones,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the inflammation is at the base of both thumbs, if they overlap, do not allow space for them to reach with the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, if the overlap affects the joint, so that inflammamoin does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	If it comes to the arm, if you bind with a bandage; and if it passes through the bandage, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there are no remedies that can be used except for the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and do so when corruption or gangrene comes on: if it comes to the first joint, then bind after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	de bo t's f s
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it rises up the leg, place it at the hip joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	If it occurs above the groin, there is no other remedy but to use the ligature on the patient's arm.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the manner of using the copper or silk bandage on the limb is that you bind it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And extend one strip underneath the limb, and another strip overtop of it.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments with a broad scalpel until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then cut or sew it, and place on each side a strip of linen so that the sinew does not touch the healthy bone;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And then bring another injury and abscess to the patient's wound;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	so if healz ce cy t
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	When you apply certain binding powders; then return to your remedy until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage of ointment, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one of the homes in this place:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	Once upon a time there was darkness resembling fire's glow.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that consumption came first in its two-fold footing so much that it consumed the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw this consumption, he cut off a piece of his foot with an axe, and was saved;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	by, that righ:
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I placed it upon things affected after body purification, and could not cease the consumption.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And I wish to wrap its hand, and do not hope for any improvement in material recovery.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	And hope the cure, qui m is au li beef, semblablement and as much them; eau le p't il est a douce lons par les. 7
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	Because the virtue of the man was weak; he lost all hope and returned to his homeland.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he touched his copper handpiece, and became well again.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not written this account for anything else but what is to be done elsewhere, if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	by the e preste que sigh after that said they way more of And  (fait; and labeled e: an Arabs...
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then they burst and pierce, and within it there is a bow, and its eyebrows droop like lances.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin above is as thin as finely torn fabric,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not reach to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "healed,"
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it becomes so swollen that it reaches to the bone in front, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and if the wound heals so that you must cut off all of the skin around it, especially when it is delicate like a veil.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And it does not hurt at all due to its decomposition.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you believe that the skin is hardened, and the decay is not in fullness.
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is spotted with yellow, then treat it as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then you use the Egyptian medical clyster which is made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take wormwood, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in one vessel over fire.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	by, which est ertae:
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And in cleansing of his intestines, and straining is done to reduce.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract while squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this much number of times until the intestines are cleansed and they have lost their contents.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	At no time is one enemaed with water of ashes.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this remedy is not available, and you take ash from the wood of the vine, and pour water on top.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then let it cool, and make an enema, until you know that the bowels are well cleansed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	ons lesse.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the enema is made with water and honey, where there is some leadwort mixed.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Or if you administer the enema of honey and mead, such that the honey has properties to cleanse and purify.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine will aid in recovery.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and w they have s r's la d. Tail if you may be tre
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the clyster from what causes gas to form within him is
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it should be that you extract a feculent stone completely, and do so using rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you may clysterize with certain medicines and salves, of whose properties I have spoken in discussing the treatments for salves.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	as they say: ce.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If the wound is enlarged slightly with a heated iron, then apply an ointment of Egyptian origin.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilisk ointment, so that it may be expanded;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, leave a bit of space here or there to allow for suturing or enemas.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	unt;s, and c;  (thought la motam Tap the pl'fors:
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the bow is fully formed, do not allow it to become warped.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover them up as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if it splits such that the bow points to the lowest place where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	;'nt; so que f can t et de main they ne we are not un feret c in a, or:le on his; be that line by the same, such as and
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	if bandaged appropriately: that the bowl moves gently downward, leaving nothing of the bowl exposed.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take strengthening medicines to put on the wound,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	by <e the same 1. Here:m[tigne y-sed so a vtre t untuden with bo fact ; line.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then follow with force to reposition the protrusion of skin; make a hole slightly wider than the first one.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then apply soothing ointment over another piece of cloth according to the amount of the protrusion.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And place it on the skin protrusion to relieve swelling, and do not remove the large piece of cloth until after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	they w.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And tell if it comes from a wound, whether it is poison or little or much, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess present or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has extended in a certain manner and you see that the wound opens to the breastbone,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	t: the mort lesse t'iech. Here est he cumtost lown la anne benze. The de bonge.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then you dislocate it in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound.
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If changed by another bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become foul with indigestion after many days, believe that the breasts are not angry.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	When approaching the wound. For there are people who delay healing by pouring wine on their wounds or doing the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if one has an unhealthy swelling under the breast after many days, such that the breast does not shrink;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breast is delayed in drying, it becomes hardened. Therefore apply pounded herbs with a mixture of wet substances and dry ingredients;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	the b (i l's; none ou so: they.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take anointing of myrrh, and make it with rose oil, and a mixture of old wine in equal measure.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then keep warm and apply it; and the same is done with cooked honey thickened.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when anointments of myrrh are not available,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	JJARs (prud; it’ the res kf by the same.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	And then apply a cloth or bandage, wrap it around the chest, and do not administer any aristolochia longum at all times.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of heavenly ashes, which are like finely ground flour and meal;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the application of simple remede or mixtures: grind them into powder, add to honey as previously mentioned, and apply.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	That same as t; il Mortset la.
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Thus say that corruption is by origin, and it makes its presence felt in the bone, or in hard limbs, or ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If treating of a pus-filled abscess, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the nail's abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	stuk;
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	When the foot or by chance is present on other bones;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is worn out and not cared for, if ulcers arise from there.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they flow and become pus until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps it becomes entirely soaked;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	to be le vunt:
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the section, if the remedy does not work at all.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary to cut out and remove all the excess tissue that has grown from the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	and le coupes to p. And so:
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	When an ungual advances its horn, and it begins to prick, and causes blistering.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	If it is necessary that you place the blade underneath the nail where it begins to prick.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and push it upwards gently and subtly at first.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And apply to the remainder of the burn with hot, corrosive medicines to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if there is a corrosion in the bone, then excavate and treat it with hot irons, because as long as the bone becomes corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	If you see the elbow crumbling, put it in a sling as described above,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat until healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is swollen, and filled with pus, and feels great pain, one must first cleanse it;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then trim the nail of the thumb with a sharp cut across.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cutting does not reach up to the vein which is under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of dislocation is felt from below at the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The dislocated joint that occurs in some people's hands by chance is completely fleshly.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes it has bone or none at all.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	the they rizzoste a lately line: and the lesnazit is not, then, and that t, and onezarde the ome flil;
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	The one who arises from any of our two doors does not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And the one who arises at the joint of both doors may occasionally move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of someone who is plump is somewhat lighter in kind:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	that heu:
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat; hold them with your hand cup.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those born or due to the previous wound, if it is necessary to cup first until the roundness reaches the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	I cannot espoids them and unattement li covient non attaché: si pei est de la charment leu; si attache the tendre les mouvements qui not, parle annexed; et, se non liaisonné et les autres place à ce que c.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Dislocations arise from a joint being out of its place, occurring either by birth, or by incision wounds, or scorching with fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to treat the dislocation, so that the joints may heal according to their natural shapes.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place it between two clean sheets or cloths soaked in oil roses, to ensure they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Between two pieces of fine cloth, as long as their ends are joined together correctly.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sensation comes to any of its fingers with the palm, then bandage accordingly as it should be.
Des vils	them and things that are done soude comme conviens is cauter with the in or heu a coute ce tout la pein ou li pas; all sues:
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are large veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that come from various body parts.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And this occurs in the legs of those who walk on stone and work and carry loads, as opposed to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must provide them relief from pus at any time, and then clean the bladder ache with camphor.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	it is not. If;<i f.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is to lift the vein and stretch it fully.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting as follows: rise the first leg with a hot bath that is quite strong until the bone marrow is well softened.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then hold the leg of the patient above the hip down to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein at one spot or two or three, with a broad incision.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then extract and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can tolerate.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	thet y:
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And resumes evacuation and cleanliness when the veins are clear, causing no trouble to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The movements of the limb should be as follows: raise the affected leg if there is much hair on it,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then place it in a bath and immerse it; the leg turns red with warm water until the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	s (1e they pr... [ou Let lesque the. The sentence the t de lo.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then work the skin at the knot, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears as you feel it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And when it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin so seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then pourchase the edge away from the skin until it is raised above the skin, and then fasten lightly to the knot.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	can bele-Kuer, l's. They consider li cont they c (do so e ch s the chertare on: Mest not ;
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then gently lift the head, as you have done before, and bend it to another cradle, as you did initially.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then cut a new incision or more if needed, then lift and suture at the joint of both feet.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then split and lift up to the second incision; then extract from incision to incision until all flesh has been removed, then suture.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	l'pros t, and they go n’s; if the quck Wade de the e le to move they heal:fa que m� al but none with:fair: Theobound the old:
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And it lies and sways, and you press from below the arm, turning your hand left and right until it slips back in place.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And ensure that it does not gape open, for if it does, you cannot draw or lift it, causing harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have drawn it fully, place a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat until healed completely.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	:
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If it is necessary to cut with haste but not too deeply, and treat as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to cauterize a vein is curved, and does not cut too deeply, it only cauterizes the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is a large curve, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said here, this is its shape.
De la voinne civile	so que p (C:n;
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is situated on legs, warm parts where no grass or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes found elsewhere than on legs, which occurs from swelling that comes from beneath the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	As it happens within the body in snakes and worms, entwined between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs at the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes to the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then change the hair, and begins the vein to flow out as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is opened, it must be wrapped with a bandage of linen from zero and a half to two-and-a-half cubits long, and the knot.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	And leave the linen on the leg, wrapping it every time there is an issue with slipping, then wrap around the linen and knot.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut a part of it off, and wrap the remainder, without covering it at its root until all of it has been used.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	but; f c'zé sisle tul is the trete; their after and C.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is necessary to treat it gradually until completion, without leaving anything or harming the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And no matter how many times this vein is treated with five or six long handfuls [of medicine].
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And once a man came to me whose vein was treated with six handfuls of the medicine and when it is concocted, he pours in one or two draugnits [measurements], and pierces all the way through.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	by:  the i'ual (1 or f. The Jons.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	On any occasion to this vein, particularly when it bursts at the joint of the foot or ankle.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And from there comes much bleeding, and then it flows out; treat accordingly as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	contort (mar; it'stfat the tet:
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And it is a small worm that forms between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body going up and down.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and feels very well in all parts of the limbs as it passes through the skin or wherever it goes, and then jumps high.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is associated with decay of some fluids, like how they come forth in snakes and earthworms and ascarids or abdomens.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its severity, for as it spreads through the body, it rises to the head and reaches the marrow.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	Sometimes it returns inward and destroys the marrow; this often occurs.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see that it is being drained and drawn out, then one cannot stop its course:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	the way; Do not can they dont'iffir. Is it is not so  (and: Mast aseth; this line:n: that theta ftd,0.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cover with a bandage and secure it firmly, and if the nerve is exposed at its origin along the bone, and you cannot locate it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If performing the fire cautery on, continue until it heals completely;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it causes is that they run to the eyes, as we have stated.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is necessary to use the remedy of corporeal medicine solutions for evil humours by means of soluble substances.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And apply a treatment with raw meats that have decayed or spoiled, which are considered beneficial.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	For the pain arising from windiness (gastrointestinal gas)
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	the said s, then: "t.t; The following:
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And so it moves from limb to limb, and I see what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to aid an ill woman, and upon examining her arms, I saw a small swelling in the vein of the elbow.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and shortly thereafter, I observed it rising like a worm on her shoulder.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	with the b t dis-cibet;t
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then after some time it spreads through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then he told me that it returned around the body as I saw him.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	by:
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Anyhow, I want to maintain that if properly moved from one place of pain to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	however, I have not seen it so in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that this was because women had dry skin, and their veins exposed;
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	the paindust:
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear so according to this reason for those who are diabetic, and have wet bodies and restored veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see to treat this illness, if the patient feels that pain as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And that par cesce ce telle a est heal them les plus peur and l'evule avoir de ou cure ite the poison of pointe desel.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	Et apply fire to the joint; and if you cannot see it with your eyes.
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If there is a treatment for those who are troubled by winds, as foul pills and sapidine pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	the pain: oughts (a, then heal sofes d, and if they ct; t;
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The various kinds of theirs are such that there are some with large points, small ones, hairy and smooth.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	those which have two edges, and those which have tongues, and those which have fragments.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that one flows into any limb in either of two ways: or it flows along the principal member with hair,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	; it’fto:
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it dies in any part of these limbs, and signs of death appear, which I will tell you about hereafter:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, for death comes in various conditions afterwards;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if this bad sign does not appear, and the arrowhead is not fully embedded, then treat the wound and care for it.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	so:
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	When there is scotoma and hardness and astigmatism and redness of the eyes, and inflamm groin and tongue, and straining of understanding, and bilious vomiting.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes there is loss without strength in the nostrils or ears; and occasionally the speech and voice are affected.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and sudden onset of white discharge resembling hairs, and upon rupture similarly to black blood;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	by What the plus icy con main.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	When the sign of the arrowhead as it comes out or enters the body is close to the left shoulder blade and feels as if it were embedded in a hard object, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And sometimes the arrow moves as hair does, and produces black blood in the wound, along with coldness, shivering, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore be aware that deaths may follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	the durt; and there (as aul se ues benc!
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters near the surface of the breastbone, it is close to the ribs; and there is much blood loss, great pain and groans; and they move all parts of the shoulder blades.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters into the belly, perhaps from a wound not affecting any of the indigestible meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters into the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder and urination is interrupted and comes out forcefully, causing the patient great pain: understand that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other parts - as made by the collarbone, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, forearm and legs, and similar limbs - are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to him, a person whose arrow first struck at the root of his neck.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and from the other side cut through the ear fat, and was rendered insensible without a sound.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And on cut another arrow that first struck in the fat of the eye behind the eyelid.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	en the s w r.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it was the large arrow from a Turkish bow, with all but one light iron in front of its ears; the yew was sound, and no accidental harm came to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And wounded an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I deceived the Saracens and subtly pursued it until I wounded him; the Christian was unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	t s ie; 1;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	After thirty days have passed and its position has not changed;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I carved into the arrow shaft and set it up with a bow, but there were no accidents or misfortunes.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	If you see a man who has an arrow fall upon him on his back or belly, and the wound is immediately sealed.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and if the arrow remains within him without moving any of its natural positions,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor should you find any disturbance in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see one other man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was swollen.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and it remains thus without much suffering from great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And pierce an arrow in one of the king's princes who was leaning forward.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	the text if they:e ne soflement le t m.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treatment after it had been three days since arrival. The wound is found very narrowed.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I treated it with great subtlety and did not feel any pain;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and there was no heat or pain from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	byt; s.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I place on the site an ointment soothing and digestive, for the wound does not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And it appeared to me the wound of the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the ointment for days, and dressed the wound thoroughly, allowing the patient to endure long periods of suffering.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	a dur bon, or vapiere:
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I apply on the wound a corrosive medicinal water for as long as it is open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried, feeling the tip of the arrowhead returning to its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then approached in the wound opening with that corrosive water until I clearly saw the head of the arrowhead.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	Then you must widen the wound so that I can place the pincers inside it, and squeeze on both sides, and they cannot be removed.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously devise methods of extraction until one day with well-made pincers I succeeded.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its form will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it, and the wound remains.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	s;
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I will then restore it accordingly; the wound is firmly closed, and the patient is completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Here is my understanding of how to extract various arrows:
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Here is my understanding of how to apply care on topics not covered by this book:
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But wise masters comprehend very little about it, and what is before them and failing.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	And in this nine work, and nine instruments are used for the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not exit from members where they are fixed but only according to two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	le les que ne tre consset m not that li, and he:S, et so as they or; c tt ond, but;  s;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And those which jump out through where they enter, are arrows penetrating into the flesh, and will not jump again now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, leave it to rest as long as the flesh is properly healed, and let the dislocation be resolved.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And similarly if it is fixed into the bone and cannot come out, let it rest for some days, changing each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	tot; the same the context.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is embedded in the skull bone, reaching up to one of the brain's cavities.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And with any of the events I have mentioned above to the patient: do not draw it out, but leave it so that after some days it becomes equal.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if the arrow reaches near the face, it is certain death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	so yout that a Jons; The reason.
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And the patient suffers for several days with a lack of strength, so use the treatment by milking.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck thus and cannot come out, then apply tourniquets around it as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals soundly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead is reset within the body and cannot be seen, then you must tear at all its linings.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	t les it’se c8 they merk le usti al beneur kfaduldernge: thembaired. The 1.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	And if you cannot for stretching of the wound, and piercing deeply into the arrowhead.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there are no bones or nerves or veins, but if the wound is large enough.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	And remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on its shaft where it is held,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If a bone is partly fixed with two parts which you can move,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the arrow's shaft as much as you are able to straighten it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, but remove it more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	:
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if there is an adverse flow of blood, arrange as we have said for treatment in this chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and if there is an incision of the nerve or vein, apply as you know how to draw out the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	and quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient as they were when the arrow fell upon them.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	that t crotes.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, or if it has opened some thing of its own, or the skin is swollen in that area such that one can see or feel abnormally:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Then size it down there, as long as the pincers can grip it, and then extract it: if it is hot now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, twist your round hand as much as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull through.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	ic:
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if there is an arrowhead within it, remove it entirely.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	If the wound begins to heal and you see that it requires dressing, then apply a suitable instrument for bandaging.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the tip of the arrowhead pierces through the material of the instrument; and then proceed to fasten it securely,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is grazed, it is necessary to remove all the flesh around where the poison resides, if you know how.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or hits the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is near, and you know how to cut thereon, then do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And keep clear of the vein and nerve, then extract it, then bandage the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak; here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	so's; heal Jue, and l’t les s.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of a hanging wart is like the feathers of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for pointing at the tip of an arrow, as seen in its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pliers for pushing and picking is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	de la.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of veins which are bled, there are .xxxii., of which it has or head sixteen.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is to know: two scissors that are behind the ears, called "herbé."
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries which appear in two temples.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	the is not mtes: ougt that you have d are, and so they n's (as line de the li est et c; f.
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	When the vein is within the forehead; and the vein by the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two vessels that are above the ear.
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, which are called "jugular veins";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	it iste en est lont ce ne de:
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins of which we commonly puncture are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the superficial (cephalic), and it lies on the left side of the ribcage, and they call it "the vein of the head."
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "fast," and it is composed of the superficial (cephalic) and the basilic,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	in the moste t.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call it "the wind's entrails," located below the phallus.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And it is that which one feels, clearly upon the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	Dislocation les eau se li cure and recoeur de joints alligle gueinant the dislocée to the esgis sachent pains which it beings sont les moldie and soies are nus le joe tient, l’mouches:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the hollow of the left side rib cage,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "nassa," that is in the ankle on the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	de cont far :
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the quality of the sinew you mentioned is such that you must raise the head of the patient.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub with a coarse cloth where the veins are; then tighten the collar on the neck with a string.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until you can see two veins behind the ears, hanging down from the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	de la.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the scalpel, and insert it from below the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand all along the vein above.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and remove the skin and vein thoroughly. Make two crosswise incisions, and let the blood flow until you see it stop.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then tighten and bind it so that it is cleaned.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	the same thing de la prchain ne com: is.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The condition of the two arteries located in the two temples, if it requires ancient remedies,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and salve ointment, and applied pressure and accustomed blinking techniques, and placing drops in the eyes with a small tool.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the salve is as I have described:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	that don’t they c.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And feel pain below your elbow, then numbness follows.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the edge of the vein up above your elbow index and insert the lancet below it.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And lift the vein upward, and tie off (and do as you have done in two other veins), and make a cut according to your need for blood.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then dislocate the limb again, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have learned from their bleeding and extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein in the forehead is equally effective for headaches and cerebral diseases and migrautes;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	by Marmettiere;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "forceps," which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And insert the tip into the vein and pierce from your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Qui li est parfaites le sang qui sont un de sang ne saignant les tire vous tu poignez the menee ointes del a la vien, si bon amiement; puis fait: and then let your sanc veille l’est enlummet:
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary for the flames to be too large; and the shin across, for the bone is near, and by chance it may break the flames when they are slender.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The two veins that are in the temples aid to the eyes, and to the temple, and to the ruddiness of the skin, and to the earlobe in the oil, and to face diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their veins is such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting any ligament as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then he sows, and let it lie damp for some time on both long and broad wound slightly, as there is no heat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the moistness is subtle, perhaps it may burst; then make clean of blood, as much as you need, and then apply woolen cloth, and wrap it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The treatment of the vein does not work with coldness, and superficial swelling, and diseases on the face.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	; If you in : the same: bon the oume (C
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of the sinew is such that the patient strains his neck, then strains its nape to your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and takes a long thin thread in the space between his two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the veins do not open easily, and blood will now start to flow from it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too far with it, and make a proper incision according to your need, then let it heal overnight, for it is often quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	It is a form of the phlegm disease.
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The fluid of the two leeches helps in stretching the vein, and at the beginning of bleeding, and for many diseases, and epilepsy, and erosion, and herpes, and itch.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the leech fluid is that the patient draws out his spleen from under both. As we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and it should be that the master stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat;
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then cleanse the vein thoroughly for a while, then handle the blood with care as needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Next, treat it again in the other vein, then heal the ligament, and gently constrict the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And do not constrain the patient; let him rest until morning when the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of veins in the lips above helps with boils inside the mouth, and decay of gums, cracks in the lips, and bleeding and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of health is that you should make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have described.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	t se t; J Rx est la car l’s to so that. The c ovla dur:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Therefore do both [sides], and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you grasp the larger of each side, and do so with both veins, one above and one below, because it is all the same manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the vessel beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	the (et les.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the sawn bone is such that the patient slices between his hands under the sunlight and lifts his tongue, and looks down on each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then cleanse both thoroughly, but do not go too far inward, as the arteries are located below.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the arm that one commonly cleans in two common ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	l'fait is.
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of this flail mistle is much renowned, and wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it needs to open plain veins filled with thick and visible blood, which contain copious and turbid blood.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	the f;
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	Et c'est plus subtilement pointu, et pour soulager les veines subtiles, où le sang est subtilement citrin.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The drainage of the sacral vein, which is one of these vessels, helps with diseases located below the throat, and neck, and groin, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary that he sanitize carefully, and wash the artery below it lies.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if you cut an artery, and bleeding occurs, then it must be stopped, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame should not be pinched but trimmed, just as one would with a hare.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the eyelids do not open clearly, it is necessary that you remove them and change another pair.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	And so m.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	Et placeau sur le flanc silencieux, comme nous l'avons déjà mentionné.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you recognize the location of the sinew, then as well remove the arm and touch the place until you feel the muscles.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the spot of inflammation, and then bind the arm, and cut into the vein silently.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	the way that o (t.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding upwards as a child's urine does, and the wound is red and subtle, know that it is from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry now, and rest your thumb for a long time, then remove the bandage where the wound is unfastened, as it often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Bind up the arm, and leave thusly, and do not let the ill person move it; be afraid of pain, and do not move until healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	* (contract as la  and they are not so far the res that. Theires c s[o;d. Jnezet this by their t – i. If you cannot. This is in the firste;
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a slice of quince, and grind it, then take one half and lay upon it until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound is closed, that's good; if not, then heal it as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the closings are not for all wounds in various conditions near the small area of the injury and the strength of the arm joints.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein of the vessel is pierced deeply enough so it draws blood from above, and below the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	for it consists of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have stated;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon that he soak it to find the nerve beneath, and if it protrudes too far, and he encounters the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	try they don’t ement.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	This nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, you should sharpen the instrument again; avoid injuring the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves and it feels long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The essence of the head helps, as it draws blood from the forehead, and benefits the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is fitting to heal by gripping the base of an olive or myrtle pile, for they are the safest of all ligatures, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath them.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is proper to seek the most gentle place, and do not strain anything if only for the first time, and then start over.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes this swells in some men, as one must go about it at the first time, but do not strain anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound is as you think.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about wound care is that a wound is treated only to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	Here's the information: 3 or more for wounds, and they be sure it heals well, here are not infection is important.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	Et it shall be the sinew made in one of the three veins that are therein: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilica.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be strengthened at the beginning of spring and autumn, and in winter after eating when signs of satiation appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it shall be fortified on the first day or third, after two hours or three days later.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	s in the woun ten t:
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary to suckle children until fourteen years old, nor a woman bearing only for the last quarter month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And should not be suckled the elderly who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to nurse in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there is excessive heat retained, so that veins do not draw out the surplus from the intestines and cause harm to the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor should those who are excessively fond of meats or intoxicated remain so powerfully affected, nor dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and be cleansed from these conditions after experiencing colic pain, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent intercourse with women or men, nights spent awake and joining, and all virtues, whether by things of the weapon or body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	s'll essa: t the ou Zt; (1.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then apply a bath if there is no obstruction, to facilitate the blood flow.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and cleanse the vein near the third joint as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect him from work, pain, dislocation, and similar things on that day;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	it a h s in the 1, so:
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then stretch the ligament gently, for when it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct it without care.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub it at length with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them there;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then moisten the patient's wound with a little old oil, and place your thumb of your left hand slightly above the vein under the length where you want to suture;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	firstly ece le Tumbet in t.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee as cords from a butcher's hook, and some of which are flat with swelling.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	when they are pressed upon the flame, if drawn back to the flame, and cannot open the veins, thus it is with these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he works on the veins, then the wound may be too narrow, so it is necessary that the surgeons be knowledgeable in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	line.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	When the flesh is swollen, and the patient's hope fades, let them rest for a day or two, without binding the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps it will bring abscesses; do not bathe, then resume cleansing if he desires to continue.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the holes are small, or the pus is subtly flowing and you doubt that it does not bleed as much as you see, then puncture the same hole directly through to the entire membrane.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	tres t c (CZ-  but by far lesse prive. If thiement.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the joint swollen, do not attempt to resume movement, and apply a bit of oil on it, for it eases pain in that area and softens the tissue at this spot with the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the oil on each vein you treat to help stop the blood flow.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And likewise make trusses and splints when it is placed on the joint; they are subtle but separate if too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if it comes to large abscesses that happen often, especially when they are not fully healed at the time of vein opening and the incision is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you do so hastily, place a damp sponge with water and salt warmly upon it, and apply the strain for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the blood evacuation from the vein, and if there remains at the site for several days any blackness or greenish coloring, it causes him no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the sickness in the basin-like area: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the lump tender under pressure from your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then putting anything on what we have said, for it may happen without an artery being cut; but give it a dry plaster to harden the lump, and then apply another salve until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see a large amount, allow it to decrease until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And one who is flat and without flesh, and in need of blood extraction, should be given larger wounds with wide openings.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite and they should be bandaged little but often, and it should be done by cutting across rather than pressing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healing prevents blood deterioration and nerve impingement, and it allows movement as in the long or wide ones.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those whose body needs the joint to be moved, give them moldy bread in pomegranate juice; if they are exhausted, move it three or four times by touching the blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have cold complexion, nourish them before the joint with moldy bread in syrup or sweet honeyed syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	If it is painful at the joint, after much blood loss, it is necessary to give him a pounded mixture of charcoal and sweet-smelling syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And utilize other things as we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting, for blood vessel evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to drain his arms, and use leeches at other times as needed, when they are greatly swollen by moisture, let him bleed a little bit and a little bit continuously depending on the quantity of his vitality.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	t c; they have sfite and:
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to treat another part, it must be treated on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; thus one must drain a great quantity of it, and dilate the passage until it flows freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you must address all conditions of illness, and place your hand over the pulse as it beats, so that death does not come while it flows.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	theyus in its: a...
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary when you see the arm dislocated, to make blood flow a second time, and since the vessels are closed, press firmly on them.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	But if it is bent, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it rest until the blood flows again; or do not touch at the tip of the flame, until the veins whose vessels are frozen and closed have opened.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	(1. If you:so t.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the vein is swollen, let it remain unbound until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bleeding of blood is necessary, let it be bled in the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is bled where the head of the vein lies because it is composed in that manner.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	they do:m : sud soceze se lesne t the d  as f. If you, and le Tad, neither its not so far...
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind it firmly so that the vein appears well, then suture while across, not too wide or too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And be the punctures wide, and suture close to the joint of the hand so that nothing can come out, then immerse the hand in warm water, allowing blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is swoln, do not reimmerse the hand in warm water again as you would in summer rather than winter.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	ki ben: The bole lk; (Cunt HCPard ; t. If the phlias.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The heating of the salve for the palm of the right hand is effective against all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Straighten the hand, and pour on boiling water until the veins are visible if you can see them;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the healing is crooked, and if it covers the entire area uniformly, do not cause any harm while doing so.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	T. If you tell;
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Then put the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, which cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have addressed the bleeding as much as necessary, apply oil and wax to the vein and quickly join them together, doing this with each thread.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The remedy for the illness in the left hand is as follows, do exactly as I have told you with the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	it'i’has e-m: M. lide by their:
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As with diseases of the bones, retention of urine, and illnesses of the joints, and old hips and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is such that the patient should pour hot water on their pain and rub it on the veins until they soften.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and apply it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, with many swellings over the bone.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	s;e; 6t' s et so that i est paslons.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you dislocate the joint above the foot, watch for nerves that are below it and cut through as in skinning; and let the bone fragments be joined similarly.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sinew cannot exit, reset the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the tendons need to be severed the first time, restart a little above on the second attempt, because the flesh is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	; 1 and so (that: m tner leursle n's d.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The head of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle near strong, and its irritation causes pain in the thigh when it's due to blood heat.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its irritation is such that the patient goes into a swoon and extends over the ankle four fingers by twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise it does not open up; and if it opens, the vein is injured in all ways you can see, including across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	* oug
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not manage it, take any cloth that covers or wraps around the arm and neck, and turn towards the small finger, and protect against bites.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And do as much to stop the bleeding as you see fit, then release the ligament, and place cotton and bind it tightly; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Dislocations of the shoulder joints
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made from horns, or ivory, or glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this method of bleeding that does not involve striking is done in two ways: either at high heat or with heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And bloodletting that involves striking and drawing blood is done on twelve parts of the body.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	This is from the neck; one part is all at the head, while another lies within the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in the two ribs of the neck; and the vein from under the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the windpipe under the two shoulders; and the windpipe under the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the pustules between the two arms; and the vesicles of the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And of the two ankles' blisters; and the bleeding from incision does not involve much blood, only small spots scattered in the wound.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason do not make any effort to move anything, as one does with wound drainage;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	the esttie:
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	When by necessity of illness it is needed to massage, or for habits, we begin each hour at the start or end of the month, and in between and every time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they need massaging, have heavy heads.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who experience swelling and redness in their face, and on their head, and around the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	with:
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	If there are those who contemplate it, they see without blood or pain and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order to bleed after 3 and a half hours past noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The treatment of the muscle strengthens the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it must not be done before the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	qui lesse ben;t that t they rir; buts the cur:chin the date with noce l'is it...
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it is not proper for those of cold complexion or with scrofula to use this, as it causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And it does not suit for those with old age or cold ailments to use them.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	the unt les deux they are;
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Ventilation within the neck is located at the level of the windpipe and base of the skull; therefore it requires extension of the body.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to incision of the channel in the throat, and everywhere, and filling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it must be done gently, for if held too firmly, it may cause obstruction or harm to the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	; please and they ou:
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the place of the sickness of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand in placing it, ensuring he does not cut the artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The incisions from below the chin indicate diseases of the mouth, and decay of gums, as well as similar ailments that are found inside the mouth; they occur near the sores on both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Incisions in the shoulders indicate diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The inflammation of joints is as much like three veins in the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deep because the bone is tender here, and it has veins and arteries beneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	and m ct is not n’s.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the veins of the legs are bled openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are as effective as ancient remedies for rains, stones in the bladder, and kidney pain; and reset the flours (sweating); and are at the two knees, and on both ankles, and always weaken the body after long use, bringing about numbness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping is that you place it first when empty and quickly draw out blood, doing so hastily, moving evenly, and not stopping until you see the spot reddened and swollen with a hint of darker blood; then firm up, replace the cups, and observe the condition of the body for those who have tanorexia (itching) or clear pores. If necessary to puncture only once, make broad and somewhat deep incisions, and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, you must puncture twice: the first time to fine-tune the path of the blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	When blood is copiously flowing, it must be stopped the third time; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we do so only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish to draw out much blood, we begin frequently; and if the flow of blood is profuse, strike firmly from front to back, so that the veins are pierced cleanly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is for those with large and hard flesh, and who have thick skin due to age, that you should apply the suction cups of oil which are invigorating and dissolving.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is as such, with ointment of violet oil or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in a poultice, with chervil oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excesses are large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	the s.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	After the ventilation with rose water or cold water, lemon water, pumpkin water, porcelain water, or any similar type.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those with excessive moisture should rise easily, using myrtle water or sumac and other similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	Those with large excesses should rise using old wine, water of mugwort or chamomile, or other similar substances.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And it is not proper to engage in sexual intercourse before or after the bath, but one hour or two; and do not sleep after performing catheterization.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is customary for him to bathe when he needs to be catheterized and when he has been catheterized.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are cold with fever, and whose blood is too thick and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	the.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And mix well, and of meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold disposition should prepare syrup of honey, and moderate-aged wine, mixing in small amounts of spices, meats, young birds, and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he exercises himself, should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	the s to ce que ne bonnez ;s m on:
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And let it be suffused with something, but one must not drink if they are hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cupping that is applied without causing pain are those placed over the liver, and joints like knees or heels, and gout, and stomach and swelling and hemorrhoids, because these parts do not tolerate being pricked anywhere.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and this is done only to draw blood from one limb to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	line.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And remove the pain when there is blockage or stone, and draw out by its attractive virtue by chance the blockage, or return the stone to its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And so do it when placed upon the liver and in the belly where there is retained gas.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these blisters are made hollow to be squeezed as often needed; and they are never filled with both fire and plain water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	(Ceste: the line sesla;
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should have two handles each half the width of a palm and around its edge one small hole as for inserting a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and be made of ivory so that it does not blunt the patient's nail when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	The pain, and çmort
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they are large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	Because children's cups are other than old ones, and slim as opposed to fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And this method must be applied with the poultice to the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the wax candle or ointment and place it within the poultice under the bandage where the shaft lies beneath the poultice,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the whiteness is at the bottom of the poultice and does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	the le sonte f ça les bon lesse ponder in m; it so you. T’semble.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And apply the bandage as before, and repeat if necessary, depending on your need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the blistering that is treated for pleurisy, immediately, it has no penis nor testicle, and is only dressed when full of fluid, and placed over the limb.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	au. Et se pli kfy ne pas the t't: bon cert the Clevise les; The chest by nnz
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in its removal of hair like a dog or cat, and similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality required is that when you find nodules that are soft with gentle smoothness feel like pus, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put it in a soft mild-tempered water, until they become familiar, and have nothing else inside;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	the be so that d; can.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and have feathers, if it is in place where you can put a poultice, do so, for this works well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the dislocated limb and then bathe it, very thoroughly, and then apply pressure.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if it affects too much the body'score of the limbs, make it sweat with a piece of flax cloth in cold water, and apply until the swelling subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	If the blood is excessive, put on powdered antimony or galls and similar substances until it is stopped.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Place half of the shelled beans in the heat and let them dry until they are ready.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If it is readieds, quil les eus lis leu cest que ongne lait;
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	If the vessels do not want to be taken, rub the fresh blood spot or insert a needle until they burst.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then place them back, and as soon as they feel their blood, let them cool down.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they bleed, dust some with a little aloe and saltpeter or ash, so they will dry now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	the d.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and involve the repair and replenishment of breaks and moisture loss.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Understand, dear student, that the wise physician is versed in this treatise, which has never been seen nor read by any ancient books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the knowledge is foreign to our land, as I have never found a good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	by  t d c that f.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of ailments that are treated, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say that the preface of this book contains the essence of its words and chapters where the wise apply their understanding, dwelling on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when you encounter a breakage or dislocation or torsion or wryness in anyone, it is necessary to support the patient on one side and another if nothing completely supports them, as with weak limbs, children, or old people.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the tension is not too great or too cold; and mix with warm juices, that is to say, cold broths, bird and rabbit stock, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with foods that cause sanguine veins to be filled, until you are free of fear of hot abscesses or material expansion in the limbs; then return the patient to their first regimen as they have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy nourishment, or viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and beef, lamb, pork, veal, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For certain heavy nourishment represents moisture and more rapid healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones from old age and decay cannot be well repaired or joined according to their natural healing of limbs, nor those too tender like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But give care, reset on the broken bone, large tendons that are strong and join the limb together until they strengthen as before; do not perform all of this work at once, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with rich meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	When the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that resemble an arc and others by sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture along a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	culzat. The following the ga : are trement; If you s t.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known as the break of bone because the joints are twisted and opened widely from behind, and they press against the palm.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or pressure on it from below, and the patient does not feel much pain unless there is indeed a fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may very well have twisting, or tearing, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary to move your hand at all, but apply the following remedies immediately and then gently strain now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And understand that the fracture which is in flight and the two parts are disconnected, they must now be set equal to each other as soon as abscesses arise.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if pus arises therein, leave it no day until the abscess is calmed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	n'z ar st set the Covme s and they byte (or.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	If the bone is in pieces and they are divided into two parts, if it's hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small limbs, or between two cords, or one cord and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural form, if the broken parts of the limb are scattered, reset it by all means and adjust them in their places as you can move them, and ensure that with your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And join well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well in the hand if you think that it is not quite right: dress it neatly, and do not extract it too forcefully or press as those who make abscesses come forth with heat and constriction of the limb, as we have witnessed many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at risk, gently restrain the patient so that he does not move, neither in wakefulness nor sleeping, turning, or any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the limb is securely held to feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	When it feels no pain at all, or just slightly, then one must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and ensure it is placed correctly, so that twistedness does not occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	; that he est la:  (e patience de se mar :
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members such as arms and legs and similar limbs; thus one should use soft and fine linen wraps.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, like thighs and legs: it is best to use a wide and sturdy bandage, for the broad bands encompass the entire limb, holding all parts evenly without any slack.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then one should use light gauzes three or four turns according to the limb's size. Tie a little more at the entire bandage and go above the fracture, tying it looser than the fracture itself, and gradually move away from the fracture site.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And moisten the ligaments a little and a little more until you grasp a large part of the joints, then take another sinew and turn it back to its proper place on the broken joint.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part above the fracture and bind it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the ligaments swatches of linen or cloth so that they are all equal, then bind it together with a bandage on top, and then put in well-made splints underneath, if there is no abscess or inflammamo.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	If there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing balm to the abscess and reduce the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then straighten the splints and let them be of a moderate width as one cuts wood or makes strips from hardwood, shaped to fit.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the splint placed on the break be a bit thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And so long as necessary for the member to heal, whether minor or major.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then you must also bind the shards in the same manner as with the first resetting, then tie above an awl promptly, just as with the initial binding on the break.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	; that theye bentrement.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	If the threads are too thick, as I have observed from the works of madmen who twist their levers made of flax thread, it is a great error because if the lever is too fine, it cannot be equal between each tooth, and it should not have less than two spaces in between.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the pins after being tightened to healthy places, then place cotton or linen rags on them so they do not slip out.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment as follows:
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to extract all shattered bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when limbs are large, it is not necessary to insert splints unless after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the risk of a heat-induced abscess.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the manner of ancient splints to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that adheres to the walls of a mill; mix it with plenty of egg, creating this concoction which should not be too clear or too thick, using it as a common means for restorative splints in various conditions, particularly among women and small children, since it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of poultice for treating fractures and dislocations and twists: take aloe vera and ladana and onion and aspetide and gum arabic and myrrh, an amount of each equal to half a pound; aloes and mirre, five ounces each; alkalis VII pounds; then make powder, and add honey with olive oil. If the patient's complexion is warm, use this poultice as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another poultice method for treating twists: take myrrh and aloe vera, half a pound each; also mirre and aloes, seven ouncuils each; alkalis III pounds; bolic armenic X pounds, grind well, mix with water or olive oil, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another poultice for joints and bones that have lost their position, and alleviates the pain when it comes; also reduces swelling in the bone: take new wool, raw gristle and fat oil, and apply at the site. This poultice does not restore, but is good to soothe a hot boil, and properly relieve pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of splinting to mend broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together to make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of splinting for mending bone fractures and healing the remaining abscess. Take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour in equal parts; grind it up, mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, use the mixture with moist coriander water or plain water to apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of splinting more effective than the first for when hardened abscesses need to be restored in the limb. Take valerian roots and flaxseeds, bladderwort, mallow seeds, and marigold leaves; also violet and chamomile flowers in equal parts; grind them up and mix with saltwater or fresh water (or wine), according to the temperature of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that nothing else should be applied to the broken limb for healing other than a mixture made of wax and oil, and it should not be too hard or too soft within two layers.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that dry and slightly warm substances should be applied to the broken limb for healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster for injuries and pain: take mugwort and chamomile chopped by men, or bird feathers, and yarrow leaves, and simmer them equally, then grind them up, and make a poultice with the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then lightly relocate it afterward, and be sure the patient feels no pain nor has moved any bone from its place; if not dislocated by mere chance.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of rest or swelling occurs, do so quickly, dislocate and immobilize the splint now; take a light bandage, and use moist sea sponge, and plunge in cold water, and lift up the limb until the itching ceases, and pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry bandage or cloth wet in cold water or rose oil, and bind it under a poultice until you are sure of heat from an abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et repose la inflammation du membre, et soit ostee le douleur, puis recommence la réduction subtile, et un peu d'emplâtre, et ne l'étreinte pas si fort comme avant; et subtilise tant qu’il soit sainez.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and ligation, then begin again as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing comes to the limb that we have said, do not loosen it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it loose for 20 days, according as you see, as long as the fracture heals, and approach the bandage with care.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then you must restrain it more than first and swell its flesh as I have said before; and if the joint dries out excessively beyond what is necessary, know that no healing can occur.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then you must immerse it in hot water frequently when you dislocate it, and do this each day, along with loosening the ligament slightly.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Thus, you should extract the splinter from the member and hastily correct what a bad doctor does by restoring the member properly: it is harmful; in my view, there are only two other outcomes - either becoming worse or being treated correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and their causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	bone. Le bleus theye, and are: ougte à son les telle of the peret ist, that you can be meth la os:
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cleaves the bone above and pierces, this manner of "absolute" fracture occurs; there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is impacted, cracked, or from striking against stone, falling on stones, or similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is an open fracture reaching the skin just below or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	t s.  (et;
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If the wound is made by being hit with a stone or falling, or similar things, and allows an osseous fragment to enter within, causing the head to be pressed as hot irons are when placed on them, if an iron enters among them.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often with those who have young and moist bones, like the skull of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it occurs in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are dislodged as such, and I will speak about them specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	All know the methods of fractures through pulling apart, and examination with tests, and by the corrupt bone that lies beneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when the bone is discovered, and if it is rubbed hard underneath, an open black break occurs.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, beware in case of an accident with the patient; and if you see any malicious accidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding outwards and reddening, and other similar conditions, do not heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unstable injury with hope for healing, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the inflammation comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day you should remove the bone that you can reach.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is summer, then hasten to remove the bn before the seventh day so that the tissue around the bone becomes corrupted, and they come to the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	;
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	When the bleeding progresses and exposes bone or an abscess, use what is necessary for treatment, and fill the area with wrung cloth soaked in oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed, and be assured of healing bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, as there are two ways of treatment: one way where you make an incision at a narrow opening in front, and this is the method.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second way is that you have various wedges of different shapes and sizes, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of forged iron; in gentle work, do not strike the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	If the bone is dense and hard, it is necessary that you drill around it so as to provide wedges with tapered ends, not penetrating beyond the top of the bone, with a margin or circle at the tip to prevent piercing through the bone; there should be several, positioning each according to the thickness of the bone, and you must have tapers for all tests (types); these are the three ways of shaping the tapers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of drilling through the fractured bone is that you place one taper on the bone and turn it until you know the bone has been drilled; then move the taper a bit further, repeating this around completely, then use the incisors to cut the space between the piercings as subtly as possible, gently, following our instructions, until you reach the bone with your hand or any of the tools you have similar to tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it out, then one must reset the preparedness which is held by the bone from any instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more sharply pointed and finer than other chisels.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if nothing remains of small bones or scales, then carefully treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks refer to, which is more powerful; and this it should be done strongly, as they say.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you open part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and when you have discovered that part, place atop its head a lens-shaped incision tool so that it takes this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut too deeply, and the part is in two sides, with the cutting towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet above, so that you lightly crack the entire bone while carefully guarding against the cloth beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is loosened to the bebone, then crack the bone lightly, for we must not harm the bone greatly and feel fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate all the way through to the skin, and the bone is cut mostly above it, leaving small pieces, then you must treat the inflammation, and have various subtle rasps from which you should extract scales in each place as deemed most appropriate according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are many coarse rasps followed by more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair and subtle fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its direction; and this is something that cannot be restored in one who has devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sinew is uncovered, it must be that you sew a piece of linen cloth according to the amount of the wound, and grease with oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another piece of linen cloth doubled in two or three layers, and grease with wine and oiled oil, and place it over the first layer; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not burden the sinew, then treat above it with a ligature, but do not tighten until it only touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and apply remedies such as lily roots, barley flour, incense powder, rhubarb, and similar things; and make a powder from these substances, and place it on the wound, and thereafter administer medicines without bitterness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	Ensure the wound is clean and do not allow pus to remain or gather swelling, for when swelling assembles over the cloth of the brain, it hardens and narrows, causing great harm; because when something biting is placed on them, they become inflamed above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be cautious because if anything unfortunate occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the pain is not due to the medicine applied, that it has effect, then one should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil mixed with linen cloth, and apply it above the wound;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of appropriate methods of healing until it is sound again.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Say that never are the two parts above broken or separated by themselves, for they are bones; and one of them is cartilaginous, which does not break but swells or twists, then becomes sound again.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary to tie your little finger or thumb on top, and make equal the fracture within your index finger, and at the base towards the inside, until the nail grows back in its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	se: t cpper sa;
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is in the part above the nose and it cannot be brought to its place, you should adjust it equal with a bit of a rod.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	If the fracture is in two parts, do likewise and restore it on the first day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the faux cest the dislocation of bles: a et les briseau le ou li sorses and is tost desceps que la mots, si tu esle choses qui les artres l'est lee de maintes eie dux à est lou est en lou chiés. Lespeces au lor mesle tret et fles disciant curez the ou a li se pluse ce que nes:
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you bind another part as well, if there is a fracture present; and let the tendons be thickened enough that they fill the pores with no sound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And the restorer said that one should crush the tendons until they are broken, and change each day. I do not believe it to be good, but it is necessary for them to be ground in a mixture of wool's milk and flour powder; then leave the tendon, as long as the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never apply goose's quills in place of tendons, and if there is a feather from the sheep around it, and keep the fracture, and blow on it to weaken the patient; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then place a compress or cotton cloth in rose oil, or with a little bit of diachronic (ointment).
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not come to the neck, then apply plaster with wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light gauze over it without binding the neck.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break in the neck is small and it has been broken into tiny pieces, then extract as much bone dust as appropriate for this case, then close the fracture, and treat with things like charcoal powder and wax, and bandages and ointments suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not have denseness in the veins or any wound, treat with stitches and apply bandages of cloth until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	For fractures of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured but there is no open wound and the break is not too severe, as if it has been broken with a stick, you can see it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	in the bl: ga (1; so f s.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, it is necessary to arrange for an expansion by two parts so that they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there are movements of the spine or twisting, then strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk; place a cerate on the fractured jaw, and cover it with a double piece of cloth; also put a large well-made peg under the cloth, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, and bind above where you can move. Instruct the patient to rest, and give him light meats for nourishment.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, relocate it after three days and then fix what has shiftwed; place a poultice on top, with much powdered meal or barley flour after you have removed the cerate; cover the poultice with light linen. If the poultice hurts, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is well again; many times it becomes well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when an abscess comes, arrange it as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no piece of bone remains loose; delicately stabilize the fragments as best you can in this manner.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fat according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	their;
de la forcele	The strength of arms
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength of arms breaks in various ways before the shoulder, and such fractures can occur in three manners: where it is broken and dislocated on both sides, with fragments present, and is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, so that you have two attendants; one should wash the shoulder where the strength of arms is broken; and the other stretches out your neck towards the injured part. Then place the fracture against your ribs such that its shape is as it ought to be, with no appearance or protrusion left over.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	s
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back due to it coming from the front, it is necessary for the patient to lie over their sling, and place under the shoulder .i. arm splint with a middle hole, and push in the ministers' hands downward until the shoulder bone is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then bring the break to your hands, and if you find fragments, it is necessary that you cut through them; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join by any support, place this instrument under one of the incisions you have made, but be careful not to harm the patient.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And shape it like a spoon, and do not make it pointed, and let its width be appropriate for the size of the bone and strength of the hand; and have two handles, if you see fit, with one wide and the other narrow, according to the direction of the wound when you set the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of an abscess being hot, if the wound is small, or if you doubt a large abscess, dress the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes about, apply oil-soaked cloths, lint, and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The tightening of bones when they are sensitive to wounds and growth is that you place on the bone plaster powdered wheat flour and egg yolk, and light bandages over it, and put a stick underneath the splint if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of palm width, then place a doubled cloth over stitches and the splint; then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band, ensuring that the head of the band hangs.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	Then place the stick over the fracture, turn the band around the neck, and below the healthy shoulder and the injured one; and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the break is held steadily, and it is clearly visible that the stick does not move above the broken bone, praise it every day, and if the ties loosen, then hold again.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And lay the injured person on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise the shoulder upwards; it will ease the fracture by aligning the shoulder, when you tie the arm at the collarbone, and not have any bad incidents come about accidentally until 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then begin the plastering again if it is needed, and hold and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is usually restored in twenty-eight days, or less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Regarding a broken shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It happens that the shoulder breaks or widens too much, and it should not be moved except by touching; then fit it according to the pattern of the breakage, and bandage it as naturally as possible in all ways you can; then put on the wound powdered meal with plenty of egg whites, and light gauzes; then place a wide and delicate bandage over it, slightly wider than the shoulder, without leaving any parts uncovered by the gauze so that the linen threads are cut equally; and then tightly tie a large bandage on top firmly, so that the bandage does not move from its spot, and check each day for swelling; and every time it swells, re-tighten the bandage and ensure the bandage is still slightly wider than the shoulder, and rest the patient'angs. The shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days, And when these numbers are completed, release it and rest assured because this is not a bone that can be put back on lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone is felt before and not near the skin, probe further, and expose the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed boil.
de la brisure dou pis	In the breaking of the thighbone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The thighbone is never broken in one place, but this happens rarely; it often breaks as the end approaches. And when it is broken within, it displaces downward, and the patient feels great pain, weakness, numbness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens cracks in the broken bone, which feels quite bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration involves the patient lying on their back, placing a cushion between the shoulder blades, pressing the shoulders, and aligning the ribs with both hands, adjusting gently to all possible positions until correct alignment is achieved; then apply splints and pads over the fracture area using fine salt or another light substance wrapped in a cloth, securing it so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its rounded shape on the back, strain gently, and release every hour as needed, re-straining if it becomes relaxed; and if detachment is necessary due to corrosion or irritation at the site, swelling, pain, or pus, do so promptly, remove the splint, cleanse the area, then carefully realign using various treatment methods; afterward, reapply the splint and strain until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	The breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaking of the ribs follows from thereafter and beheaded are the head to examine well and it is not this done in order:
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resets are such that you make the break evenly, as necessary. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the broken ribs are descending into the abdomen, causing the patient great pain and pointure, as from pleurisy, because the bone lacks flesh; and it is covered with swellings, and vomits a large amount of blood, indicating serious health issues, which our predecessors have treated with great care.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it should be administerired meats that inflate the belly to push the fracture upwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not attempt this if there are no pus-filled abscesses present, unless they have already come about.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, proceed with the procedure.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that they apply cups on the site to promote healing and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the cups may attract excesses to the site due to its weakened state.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	;  the em (chief by:
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the bone which pierces the vein, causing doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to fracture at its original location of the broken rib, and it is necessary to insert a device to protect the artery; then one must cut open the bone, gently drain, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with embalmment until healthy. And if an abscess occurs, apply soaked cloths in oil roseate on it; cover it at its original location; care for the area where appropriate treatment is needed for the abscess, and let them lie insensible upon the ribcage or wherever they should, until healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the broken rib's bruising
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No breakage of the bone occurs in the ribcage and it does not happen that it sags; and likewise in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take care if you see their hands softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick with a needle, it does not feel. Know that in some cases it is fatal, and if it moves and feels well when they are strained but not to the point of pain, know that the joint's bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if treated properly.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care if their legs are softened, and there are injuries present in several places, and on top of their back they jump with stiffness and egestion without willingness; and when it has been soothed over its belly, it jumps with egestion without will. And when it is soothebefore the spine and wants to fall, it cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not hesitate in providing care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this injury does not occur, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to apply soothing oil or olive oil from young olives if there is an inflamed abscess, then place it on one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is well again.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with a cloth; remove the bone, then stitch both edges of the wound together if it is large, then dress the wound with healing salve until well, and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as "chiés de la kowe", place your left poultice in one hand and balance it equally with your right hand at full strength, then apply a comforting plaster and elevate, if needed; then bind it, and if there are any dislocated bones, do so, remove them, and treat the wound until well.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the fracture of the hipbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there's a slight reduction at the top; it causes long-lasting pain, declines toward the pelvis, brings pain to its place, and swells as though broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until touching the fracture; and identify which bone is broken and its shape; if the fracture is solely at the head, then make an equal break so that it assumes a natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it inclines towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that breakage is aligned properly.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed it evenly, then place on the splint, then put under a wooden or metal stake and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and let down from above the ribs until it is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy ribcage or backside.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess occurs there, do not touch it until the abscess is eased; and then proceed with what we have mentioned before; and after that, return to restoration, and hold (the wound) as necessary, unless there has been a mishap; this is how.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of a shoulder joint fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is what lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, then it must be restored in one of two ways; the first being that you take a straight stick of medium girth following this shape.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And then make two loops and tie them up at the top of itch, and apply to the patient; then gently break on the stick, until healing occurs as long as heals, and have a support sticks with something lightweight or appropriate for applying the stick applies to him, and then place them evenly.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one suspends the patient over his hatter, then ties his hands to his neck, and commands two ministers so that one dyes what is above the break in his hands, and the other dyes below with wool all around it, and stretches each part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too deep, tie a wool thread below and above the break, and each minister stretches their part. And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, it is proper to place one wool thread under the armpit, and another towards the neck, below the break; similarly, if the break is towards the neck, you must gently tie a lighter thread without too much effort until the break is even on both sides, and then adjust as needed, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms, do not strain until after six days, and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil of roses to ease the abscess; then strain it again, and the method for straining is as follows: place the heated iron over the break, assemble the arm on top of the shoulder or near the breast, put your hand on the shoulder or chest, strain at the shoulder, and along the arm so that the arm returns to its natural shape unless anything prevents it.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you suspect that the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two spaces between each splint; so each splint is large enough to cross the fracture by three inches from either side; then strain over the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on setting broken bones, more tightly and less spaced apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the condition of the splints and tightening as we have said, in the hour when you return the broken limb, and doubt that the sore is hot, let it be bound up until the seventh day as we have said; then check every three days for swelling or any signs at the site where veins cannot come due to excessive tightening, just as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such events occur, then the bandage should not be loosculed until after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands over his stomach; and place a pillow of equal wool under the shoulder, and check every hour during the day or night that there is no movement in the fractured limb or its bandages are softened. If so advised by the power of medicine, and give it meat as we have previously prescribed; and when it begins to regain weight. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be healed in forty days altogether; then loosen and administer baths and balms of ointments at the site to direct the place. And if the swelling is unsightly, delay until one month or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of a fractured arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of two bones called 'foscilia', one small that supports the forearm and one large that extends from below toward the little finger; sometimes only the large bone is fractured or the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bone is fractured, the restoration and healing are easy; but when the large bone is fractured, it requires poorer treatment and takes longer to heal than if both were fractured together. If only the small bone is broken, then minimal extension is required for alignment.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	f; the mis they l's; & of that est il fait pouss but it d none.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break to pieces, place each in its place, and if any are dislocated that they grip their root, and you cannot restore them to their place, then make a cut above and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the wound's breakage, I have spoken to each physician; they should take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of healing, boils appear, then apply with a cloth made of rosemary oil and white wax; it should neither be too hard nor too soft. Place each piece carefully, until the boils are soothed. Then remove the bandage, and put on an ointment of fine powder mixed with plenty of egg whites; and cover the edges of the tear as well, making them thicker than the others; and know that it should have seven or more strips depending on how the tear is situated: whether in one bone or two; and pull tighter towards the tear than other places, and every day reduce slightly, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages be soft and damp, not hard or rough; and use thread made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And care for the limb and ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	If any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon a limb, you must wash the limb with warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not be in strict rest. Then resume straining, and if the bandage is softened and the bone relieved, and similar things, proceed accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If care must be taken as the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it slightly and let some days pass until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have mentioned come to the patient, let them wear it until xx days or longer; then put the straps on their neck and make sure they are even, and watch for movement and displacement, and sleep on their back; know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxv., and possibly in xx days, depending on the compositions and constitutions of the substances.
de la brisure de la main	Of a fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It happens that in the palm of the hand and in the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather a bending occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to bend over crookedly and lie directly in front of them; then put your hand under an extended table, and extend the broken bones, and align them with each other until they are properly joined; apply a plaster and use splints, if there are no abscesses, then place a cast according to the amount at the site; and wrap it in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and I ne:
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the lower part of the limb, it must be placed with a stake underneath and another above on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap it entirely around the wrist, keeping the ligament between the bones taut.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of our forearm bones, and it's a simple break, position it equally as needed; and bind with bandages, keeping the joint straight; and if you see that placing a small upright stake lifts the fracture, keep it immobile. And if the faster is in one of the other forearm bones (such as the index or another), position it equally and secure with the healthy bone behind; or bind them all together into one bandage, ensuring proper movement, then place a stake on top; and be cautious during wound healing and abscess drainage, and treat any swelling that occurs as I have described.
de la cuixe brisie	For the fractured hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration involves placing a splint above or below the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant extends their hands equally to all parts of his body; and this is when the break occurs within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is close to the thigh's root, then one line should extend towards the hand and the other below the break; similarly, if it is close to the groin, then there should be a line near the groin and an extension upward; then place the splint evenly with his two hands until they are in accordance with its natural shape, and then put on the cast, unless abscesses arise.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	When there is an abscess, let it be soothed and then return to your work and care; the ligature is made in part.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture with a durable double bandage of two or three bands, and manage any excess, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the knee, and wind a long thread between the thigh and leg, below the hip joint; then bring the upper end of the thread upwards. Then turn the leg and thigh with the bandage, then place an abutment on the fracture site, then place another abutment on the bone of the leg; then insert a slip between the leg and thigh using soft cloth to ensure even tension, then begin making three or four twists above the fracture; as you wrap more over the fracture, reduce the strain. Then return to both ends of the thread that was placed between the leg and thigh, then place three abutments that are above, then go back up to the top end of the thread until you reach below the knee joint; if it does not move from its place, leave it as such, then remove any swelling or pus-like discharge.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that the joint is dislocated, and follow what comes out of this, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, then you should be able to handle them; but if they cannot be handled, it must be split open, and pus drained. Treat it as we have described until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And at no time is the thigh broken as when it is set with nails, like in the shoulder and arm; however, in such restoration done, the patient does not feel relief.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored within a day or so, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the groin area there is often little breakage but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's just a cut or a puncture, and occurs at any wound, feels like a wound, and this hurts terribeinly.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration if one puts equal what is left at its place as much as they can move; then they put in an inflorescence, and insert a round stake if needed, and strain it as required, then address all dispositions that we have mentioned elsewhere for breakages such as abscesses hot and other similar; apply to each accident what is appropriate until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	That there are two bones in the leg, one called by right 'mustelz', and the other called 'foscile'; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore its restoration is done just as that of the arm similarly, and its treatment is also.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen; then reset without pressure. Then apply extension evenly, and set it straight, securing the ligaments evenly as well; however, if the break is severe and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be smaller and lighter; adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of waxed wood that extend the length of the leg from groin to ankle on both sides; then wrap twice in layers, tying them together firmly, and at this tie the leg cannot bend to either right or left, thus it is well done. Anyone can administer a long bandage made of wood if necessary, placing the leg for immobilization, and properly doing so at the site of fracture with wound; daily move the leg to check for abscesses or other incidents, and treat until healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	On the breakage of bone in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bone of the foot it comes to a fracture and the bones are slightly dislocated, with no injury occurring in some other conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture in the bone of the foot and you see these bones protruding from one another, place it with such heavy weights on the ground as if it were to move, then now put your foot under his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, then securely wrap a small tablecloth around its abdomen below the foot for two finger breadths, and align the foot properly again, after which you have enveloped wraps all around, and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones to be equal again, whether fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the fingers broken, then repair them as we have said for the hand; then put a rod along the length of the finger, and make it slightly wider at one end, then place under the foot the table I mentioned, and straighten immediately; and if there are 2 or 3 or more, break each finger and place a rod according to its quantity, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and strain the table beneath the foot; so that they be opposite the stomach of the table.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each incident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	For a fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, have her sit with legs apart, then lean to the painful back and be held at the rear; then fill her bladder with cotton, and insert as large as one stalk; then let her stand up, and lift her back little by little, so that the cotton jumps into the entrance of her nature, and restores the bone with the stalk; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has relieved herself, reset it, and thus do this for seven days or more: the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a sheepskin bladder, tie on its spout a rag, and fill the whole bladader with nature; then blow into the rag until the bladder is empty inside it: her nature will return to restore the bone. Then let it be filled with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it feels right.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the arm or hand is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these close fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For fractures indicate various ways to properly restore: thus indeed.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the broken, and that you restore, que venter est fuit la.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be healed now so that the signs we have mentioned testify to them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed and there are no foreign bodies present, then again begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	When abscesses occur there, allow the healing until the third day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch or disturb it either on the second or fourth day, for you would bring about a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible at its location, it must be carefully set with slight pressure from your hands in small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not allow you to set it even with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has six or eight long claws and the width according to the size of the wound; thus the surgeon must grasp three or four (claws), as needed for each bone fracture case; and let them be round and a little thick so they do not bend when compressing the limb at your work site, and let it be blunt in front, and wide in the middle towards the end like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	The head of the shoulder is called "palainge", thus it requires that the curved bone be placed over the visible end of the bone; and press down once, until it returns, so they are even on each side. And if the fracture is subtle, and the protrusions cannot properly grip the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone, so that the protrusions have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with an appropriate instrument for this, either incising or sawing, to your ability; then extract the one remaining in the hardened bone and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone has been brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do as much as possible to return it to its proper position; then apply a cloth soaked with black vinegar tincture, and properly if it's a woolen piece; and do not put any cerote or other ointment on the wound that has oil, lest it brings forth putrefaction and corruption. Then provide dressings as you have restored the bune, leave the wound exposed, and cut off all coverings entirely according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure to take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, leading to death or corruption in some cases. The tension should be softer and more supple than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that an unforeseen complication may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then do not apply a poultice; but wrap around it, near the area of the wound, with stiff cloths. And when after one or two days you observe bending bowing over the wound, remove what you previously applied to everything, and put healing ointment for wounds as an unguent tetrafarmacist uses in similar cases.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to loosen the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be set in such a way that the bow bends gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If more than one day passes and it cannot be joined but returns with pain, because there are small pieces of bone in the way, then you must carefully cleanse the wound and remove all those displaced fragments that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If there is an abscess at the location, or any other form of corruption, you must treat it as described in this chapter earlier. And when bone is broken and open on a limb, similar to the hip or shoulder bones, and other large-limbed injuries, do not attempt to suture it, for many times death occurs but let it heal until it hardens; after perhaps xx or xxx days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruises that appear around the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and the unpleasant sight is to see the deformed limb; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	So take care then if you treat us with medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, among other similar things; either one or all of these combined, mixed with stipulative wine, vinegar, or honey-water; put them in a nutshell without loosening it for days on end; then disassemble it and restart another until the inflammation is gone; or strain over a perfectly crafted piece of bone; because its property is that it draws out all the swelling from above the limbs; and if the inflammamoin has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut off the excess, then cleanse until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The member that is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the broken bone is restored and remains after the weak and subtle members, much occurs for various reasons: one because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should; or because there were too many ligatures and could not come to nourishment of the limb; or due to excessive rubbing; or from too large movements, not in their time; or because there is little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	The cure is that you make the patient eat well and keep their body supple, until there are many blood vessels in them again; and administer a bath to them, giving joy and ease; then apply heat to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and often rouse with warm water until nourishment returns to the member; then let it return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The twisted member after health is restored
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and bone broken open, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, yet not contrary to its natural function: do not believe those who say that the entire member must be replaced with new ones; many a fool has done this in our land; such procedures are blamed, and often lead to great harm, and sometimes death; however, if the dislocations and twists are fresh, it is necessary to soak them in hot water, or mollifying herbs cooked like meadowsweet leaves, roots, and poppy seeds, and similar substances; then make a mild poultice, as with well-made diaquilon, and take the musk root of valerian and mix it with linseed oil or hazelnut oil, and apply the poultice; or take fatty figs, crushed with flax seed flour, and similar medicines that alleviate tension.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there are times when bone dislocation is fixed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with damp hands. Therefore, allow some movement to the affected limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And incession is gentle and apply the wound as it's treatment with antique d’estrop de tienne, ou il esmettre unc, beet les mors ne soie l’ou est sejolt a li sire; et poinz cil nulli.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint is out of its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When any dislocation occurs, now you must return it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	In any case, when this occurs, make the patient a poultice, then leave it; until the swelling is soothed; then wash the limb with hot water and oil, then gently bandage each part as needed when care arrives at its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder joint dislocations up to fractures.
des mandibules	Of lower jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones become dislocated outwardly, and there are two ways of dislocation for both: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a bit; or they are entirely dislocated, hang toward one side, causing saliva from the mouth such that it cannot be held in, nor can close its mouth, enveloping its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and finished, one must reset it promptly and not hesitate.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a way that the minister moistens the patient's head, and inserts a mirror slightly pinched from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth; if the dislocation is of two parts, the other hand should be ready to make it even; and instruct the afflicted to soften their jawbones and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The mirror is placed to make it level, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if resetting is difficult, especially if it involves the two jawbones together, soak them with warm water and oil until they can be moved gently; do not pull on the reset bone as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	When they are returned evenly and the wound of the patient is well closed, then place on moistened cloths in a bag made of oil-soaked linen and wax, and lightly bind it with soft ties.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, ensuring they do not move to either side or strain themselves in any way but encourage light food intake until the pains are gone and the jawbones have healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then feed him what he desires lightly and do not allow him to work on opening his mouth for eating or drinking until the jawbones are fully healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two lower jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not restored to their original positions, fever and usual sweats may occur, and possibly intestinal obstruction, and perhaps they vomit clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know it is fatal; and many times the person for whom it occurs dies within seven days.
de la forcelle	of the sinew.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strong bone cannot be dislocated from within the ribs and at the end of the shinbone, and it is not dislocated even once by accident, but one feels it keenly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms; then firmly presses the place with your palm, and it returns; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head that is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if not possible, and if it dislocates once again, bring it back to its place as we have said; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind, and instruct the patient to rest until they are well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And likewise, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	That one must understand that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way it dislocates from the ankle to above; and another occurs at the lower part; occasionally it may also dislocate upwards, though this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it does not dislocate backwards nor inwards affecting the nerves; and at times it may dislocate downwards towards the ankle, especially in those with little strength, for them it happens quickly; to those with enough strength, it occurs without much difficulty, and returns just as easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally some men may experience blows or fractures, and their shoulder swells with intense heat, believing it to be dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore to try it out until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that with dislocation when tilted towards the elbow, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their various manifestations.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and from the elbow to where the head of the shoulder reaches, as if it were two ears; and the patient cannot return his hand to his neck, nor move in any motion.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	by
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This method of dislocation must only be reset when it is new or if the child is unwell.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And this way is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upwards and then place his thumb under the elbow, lifting the joint forcefully towards the upper part of its location. The minister will then release the hand and extend it upwards as they position their thumb below; it shall come about promptly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	the empresso, it. And theirs, and hand la location, ester, lesse;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then place a sling under the patient's back and put an even strip of linen on his shoulder, not too thick nor too thin, then position the footrest beneath the strap, and lift the head of the dislocated shoulder gently, and guide the hand with the malaise.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and other ministers wash the patient's head with the affliction so it cannot move downwards; this shoulder returns immediately now, and if you observe the resetting according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and that you have present a man who is taller than the patient; and stand to his left side, and bend the dislocated shoulder under the strap of affliction, and lift it upwards so that the afflicted hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other ministers rub the patient's hand downward towards the belly. If the patient is too light, do not weigh them down with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns at once.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the reset is also done in another way: and it is so that you insert a long stick into the ground, of which the head of the shoulder resembles an earthen spindle, neither too large nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is placed under the patient's arm, but with cloths soft above it, and the shoulder remains lengthened its long bone; then stretch out his hand downward to another side properly, and the dislocation will return quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	If it does not want to return due to all the reasons we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take a piece of iron from two arms, lengthwise 1 and width 4 fingers, which has its head recessed on both sides for insertion through the shoulder socket as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then cover the head of the fust with cloth so it does not chafe the patient's skin, then place the fust beneath the shoulder of the injured side; extend both arms above the length of the fust, tie the shoulder to the fust, and bring the arm over the top of the hand, then position the arm under a wide strap on an ointment bench, with palms facing downward, leaving the body hanging from the other side: the joint will be held in place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put a woolen thread beneath the shoulder, then apply an ointment cloth of powder from grinding, with incense and myrrh oil on all around the shoulder, then quickly strain undernehemenent, and turn the linen over the ointment, wrapping it around its collar, and let the hands hang in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary for him to rest as long as the limb is comforted, because it will heal sooner; then have him rest more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; and if it is not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is severely out of place due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary for you to apply fire cauterization at three points, as previously instructed with the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it is still dislocated after 6 days, and the joint cannot hold or lift either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the top of the shoulder may be cut or stretched out or softened; and realize that the joint will never fit back into its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the groin and legs, or behind, is made by impact, stretching of hands, and another instrument is used; and treated until it is set right.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes weakness in the limb and delays in movement, causing the patient great pain many times until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is believed that the joint of the elbow has been dislocated by pricking, and it returns to its place; if it has become completely dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, then the dislocation cannot be repaired because one can clearly see it and feel it; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated elbow with its sound counterpart, if it is clearly visible. For the joints are misaligned, and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset them as soon as an abscess appears because if the abscess comes about, then its retraction would be painful; and sometimes they cannot be reset entirely at all, especially when they are behind; this is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and possibly death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	When restoration is such that it can be returned to its place, extend its hand between your two hands; and spread its arms wide, and the fingers as in the custom of turning it around, downward and upward, rejoin the joint with all its pieces, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, when it comes back after doubling its hand with its own hand and fixing the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then provide strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and they tie both arms so that they do not move during extension; then turn the arms in each direction, then wrap a wide and long piece of cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	When the head of the joint at its articulation reaches its end, then apply oil to soften the joint, and then put it back in place until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is upright, then put on dry plaster with egg white, and reset it properly, and support the arm against a pillow at night, and leave for several days before releasing.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligaments and let them be loose; and if you see that the joint does not grip well, restart with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is securely placed; then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	If after resetting the joint and it moves again, then bathe and rub well, and press until relieved; or place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, leave for one day and night, then remove the bandage, and make them take a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If it sweats, then rub the joint and promptly reapply the sheep's wool, then make them take a bath; do this two or three times until they are well; if you see improvement, put moistened wheat straw heated with butter on it, and wrap. It will return to its proper state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its return is easy, more so than other joints. It must be brought back to its place promptly, in the same hour it is dislocated, as well as if the limb is swollen or an abscess appears hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the method of bringing it back is to place the afflicted hand under a table, extend its fingers, and level them out so that they put their palm at the sightline of the joint, pressing until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Of course, you must ensure it is properly in place; then the patient should put their back of the hand under a table while extending and moving it back.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of their hand under a table, and the healer places their hand beneath the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, apply soothing plasters to abscesses and let them begin healing anew.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot be tolerated, and you are unable to place it back in its proper position after several days, the dislocated joint remains twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	Et ne nuit niant au malade, for he may not grasp anything until his hands are softened, and cannot hold any object: then you understand that the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other remedy but to grasp by cautery near the case, and perhaps it serves no further purpose.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are placed correctly, place them on the plaque we have mentioned, then grasp it and leave for 5 days, then release and keep like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no loosening, then apply warm water to the area, and rub until it becomes smooth.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Dislocations should never occur to the fingers of the hand on either side, nor at the back or front of the palm.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Once they are dislocated, apply pressure to the affected joints until it reattaches, then support the head of the finger and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	Leave it for two days, and then place it level on the same day; and during this time bind it as we have said, leaving it bound daily, and make it move, and untie it nightly; and do this often until it becomes straight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Do the same if it is dislocated in the hand's palm, and do as you have done before, until it is straightened; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Double dislocation of the spine or backbone.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several occurring, there is no remedy, as it hastens death for the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are such that the excretions flow without volition, cannot be held in, and many times any limb is weakened or one hip, or either of the arms or legs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the spine moves in two parts; when it moves at the rear, it is called "gilboosities."
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is to ensure that you reset it if the swelling comes from childhood; otherwise, there will be no healing or remedy at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from a fall or impacts or similar things are treated by ancient methods with great words, which do not yield much benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention and have formed plasters in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	first paragraph by. ousd et de tous riglar.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also those that come directly to two sides, and cannot be healed except the one properly coming along the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and that the sick person is stretched on their face at one equal place, and has support removed from underneath them so they do not sway.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then the patient's hands and feet, and heels, so it lies other diseases.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the joints, among the two fires;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	lesquelles leesd and ests eus semblant on tru iez ils dries that they are; but aye pas si: he tolest the li celes en bailte est. Onlteste, and dele pesties: andre les quellis et ses lettres que sont tis and l'en leus eie.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	If it does not return with this method, take a stick three hand lengths long and place the patient's head on it, their side against the stick, then position the middle of the stick along the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And securely fasten their legs to the opposite end of the stick, and apply pressure until it returns to its place; if you see this happen, make the turner rotate towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And that you insert two pegs at the head of one arm lengthwise, and towards the other leg, with between each peg an ample space in length.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And each boil should have a pus point where the knot turns, and the boil be firmly in place so it does not move; and between each pair of boils there should be one turning point, on which the ligaments turn, and two small boils the size of a palm's length for turning the knots.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the ligaments that are among the joints at the knot towards the head, and the other ligaments towards the fingers at the other knot, and each minister turns its own knot along the entire ligament, and the master places the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are made even, then place a drying substance with plenty of heat over it, and then the poultice, and then the plaster from a board three fingers long, that covers the leakage site and the healthy spine part, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for healing until the patient is well;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	Et si quelque chose arrive à la fin des soins, il convient d'administrer des médicaments calmants et assouplissants, avec l'aide que nous avons mentionnée auparavant; et jamais ne mélange on une pièce de plomb.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And never shall it appear in the back of the spine, and consider that it might be dislocations; and 'tis the bone that is affected, therefore one should not have any assumptions: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Des dislocations du genou
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	That the joints of the thigh and the shoulder do not come loose except by dislocations alone, nor as other joints; and the thigh's joint is dislocated in four parts: within and without, and front and back; and more internally than externally, less so at the front and rear.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of inward dislocations is such that when joining the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens more on the side of the injured than on the healthy, so the injured cannot double its joint at fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the swelling of an abscess hot because the hip's head comes loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	The sign of it occurring to one is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of it occurring to one is that they extend their leg according to completion; however, do not double-fold the knee causing pain, and if you want them to walk, they cannot before, and holds in their urine, and swells the ankle, and when they go, passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of it occurring to one is that they can spread their knee should be loosed from above and weakens, and is the other leg, and are the shoe.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resets of this type of dislocation are such that you should check if the dislocation is recent and it remains according to its nature, there is no remedy for it; and it does not require any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must quickly return the joint, push it outwards and upwards, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will reappear on its own without needing further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, you must summon a strong assistant and support the leg strongly with two hands or with one bandage tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other ministering physicians extend their hand over in such a manner that they place their hands below the shoulder blades, then grip them with a light line above the hip; another pulls on the neck by the line.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground completely, and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four similar cases; and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is fine.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then attention must be given to its appearance. When dislocation is in the jaw, it is necessary to support the patient on their pain-free side, then place a bandage at the base of the thigh, and extend the bandage up towards the groin, and towards the calf muscle;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then secure additional supports on their arms, and envelop the affected thigh with bandages, and extend them to the desired form; it will now return to its place; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong ribbon undernee both heels and over the knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang from a length of wood on the head or have two long arms on the ground; then command one minister to hug the patient's chest with their thigh, and another minister(s) also suspended with the patient, who must embrace the entire buttocks firmly, for now the joint quickly returns.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is below, if you place the patient on their back as we have mentioned in those with phlebitis, and properly separate a band around the affected leg and near the groin.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two heaters, one on the head and another underneath the feet, then insert a tinder between the buttocks in front of the patient.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And with the wrapping of moistened cloths around it, so as not to alarm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the doctor places the dislocation evenly into his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, this is good. If not, then place on a board as we have said in the case of fractures, and press until the patient lies down securely.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is present, it should be extended quickly, and according to what I have said; place the minister's hand on the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in its natural place, one should not extend or lift the patient's arm, but instead let it hang as it would have after being dislocated naturally, as we have described when lying on two bent joints;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be supported by its face, the bandage is extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed on the joint against the board.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and shall be supported when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; then place the heels together, and put on the plaster cast, and secure with a bandage so that the joint does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	For it rests for three or four days, then reset the dislocation and apply a poultice on top; if you see that they are evenly aligned, hold steady as before, and leave for three days; then reset the dislocation again, and let the limb move easily until it is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	For the dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: internally and downwardly, and backwards; it does not dislocate forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not reach its hip, say that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back to his face, and put your foot under his feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his ankle in your palms and retract between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the ankle gently; another assistant extends his foot until the knuckles return to their place, and the signs are that it easily reaches its hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the plaster over it, and elevate the leg to the hip, binding them tightly together for 3 or 4 days, then release it; and do not allow the patient to move during this time until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb has not healed completely, treat it with firm binding as we have described in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	For ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is never completely healed or fully dislocated, but both within and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And if the symptom is such that the ankle is ejected, and it moves towards the part where it was dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And such as est de.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	When it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and tie them with a strap outside the leg, above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw the leg towards you with your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, then extend it upwards, and firmly raise the foot high.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	Do this twice as we have said, extending and pulling the leg; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, because it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	If it cannot return in this way, then lay the patient on their back on the ground and firmly place a stake between their thighs, and wrap them with cloths so they do not move.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then dye the minister's thigh and have another minister extend the patient's feet with hands or ropes so they are tied above the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and the stakes be kept in place between the patient's thighs to hold them when they are stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then realign the joint correctly with the dislocation using your hands, and other ministering anoint the leg from below, so the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it reaches its limit, place the dressing and compress above, tightly bind with bandages around the leg, and watch over the veins behind the ankle to ensure the ligatures are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligatures become loose, re-tighten the bandage; then release on the third or fourth day and advise the patient to walk by four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	If it moves towards the end of this term, it is not certain yet that it does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to this place, it is necessary that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	From the dislocation of both shoulders
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, they should be extended with ease, which is a simple thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the shoulder or foot bones, one must make the patient sit with their back to a plain ground or table fully upright and place their foot under the joints that are affected. Then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	the d patient de so that they 1, and cont: or.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees it must be restored, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not overconfident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassein and merciful and slow to act, then do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	the ine d.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, reset the member to its place now, as if an abscess may arise there.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the member is in place, administer soothing things to an abscess there, and treat the wound as needed, with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if the dislocation is in fragments and small bones are to be extracted, along with the bone, do as we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	her.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The explicit rule of physics
