O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and I have brought it to its conclusion with the explanations and declarations made by him.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision I came to know that I have completed this work with this treatise, which is part of the old book of hands, namely "chirurgy".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the book of hands is well established in our region and has been transmitted to every part of it, if that science dies out, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions found in ancient books written by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and arrogance, understanding is closed and the science has been separated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise by following its path of exposition and declaration, abbreviation; and bringing together the forms of instruments used for cauterization, and other tools from the old book, along with their application and preparation as is proper.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands has been found in our time, the art of medicine is turned aside.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it requires someone who will immerse themselves in the science of anatomy, as Galiens says, so long as they know the judgment of bones, and their forms and combinations, and are acquainted with the bones, nerves, muscles, and number of limbs, understanding their movement and resting states, and from where their issues come.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Epicurus said that it is not much with the ignorant and little with the old work; and therefore in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that who is not knowledgeable about what has been said before, he will fall into error and harm others; therefore I have often seen many like those who involve themselves in this science and abandon it, lacking understanding and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a foolish man who performs an abscess operation on the backbone or the side of a woman and cuts her arteries, so much blood flows out that the woman dies in his arms.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I see another man who betrays a large stone by piercing it with an arrow, and the stone was big; he carried away part of the bladder with him, and wounded him within three years.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I would have already been called the traitor for this treatment of the sick and the size of the wound, and I know well that if his condition had deteriorated further.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I see another man who treated Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had an open wound; the doctor's ignorance restricted the break in the wound as much as possible by bandaging it tightly, and left no room for drainage from that wound, and ordered him not to drain it; and remained so until his leg was completely amputated and he died.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I came to him and hurrying up to see him as fasten the leg; and when I saw that he did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	C'sainte en ire de lou maunde paroles parlez ilmeant ite: ententende in olden parlement ofiours, aurobeautes.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	nichement.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a sore, when it is pure of black bile, does not require that we touch iron on it unless part of the body has opened up, which allows everything inside to be destroyed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, cutting off a fillet, it is necessary that you know that work of hands is designed in .ij divisions: namely, whether the heart or it has danger in several positions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason you need to be careful, so that the old physician does not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in defense, and engage your ill-fated limbs hastily and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may be saved and honored; and leave to suffering spontaneous diseases their proper remedy; and weaken your weapons so that no doubt exists about you, and make sure that through all this world you can come back with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen made it clear with one of his admonitions: "Do not treat the bad illnesses, lest you call the wise physician foolish."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatment according to .ii chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cautery and bloodletting, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet; and concerning the forms of incision, and surgical strikes with cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered with respect to the forms of incisions.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about the repositioning of dislocations and twisted joints; and it is ordered from head to toe as well as the forms of incision.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So since our memory of old, it is required that I mention the quality and harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality and harm of help is the longest word and most subtle science and secret replies; from which various surgeons spoke about it, and agreed to it, but little pleased them with my words because I fear being prolonged.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the aid of cautery is universal to all constitutions, for it has matter in two ways: namely hot constitution with dry matter and cold constitution with wet matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the combination of hot and dry matter, no one decided and they said that cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is only good for diseases caused by heat and drought.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used as a treatment for diseases caused by heat or drought; and those who said otherwise stated that cautery provides great help to such heat-and-dry diseases coming from within the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body and its moisture to hot constitutions, you correct the body's alignment.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, we avoid them not unless they have tried it themselves, know well the chapters of cauteries, and the variety of constitutions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies for the times of the year; as for other constitutions we do not fear, especially in cold and wet illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all those who are great joined together and agreed upon the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And you know, my son, that in combination with fire the secrets of cures are found, and more benevolence than hot medical preparations.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple and does not come from the limb that is cold; it only affects such a limb and harms no other member very much.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The medicines coming from another member causing when it separates them and bring about disease to the patient; and occasionally they cause pain.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Laet siens tote dexpressé à mains parler in this 14th century vatims aisin theures.troisame tounce of theu (Latin.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	suregachute.  alex:give:ceterfeu isseverre haste,regements. The text andesculumbreatck Iescription. Andre of thevexacme:nce:troi, without (instrumental.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you must know, son, when during that time they agree on how to perform the cauteries, and apply them immediately afterwards.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that caustic is always appropriate, because the pain caused by its application with aids of caustics is borne within the time; and especially when cauterizations are necessary for essential pains or hurts which cannot wait until greater harm does not affect the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you never think, dear son, about how the foolish man acts; for there is no return on a disease healed by caustic treatment; and they say so in this way: however, it's not as if they cure with them since cauterization does not affect complexion or dry the humors which are the cause of pain, but rather it serves to quickly remove value from the body and its work and dignity.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the choice lies that disease does not grow according to the constitution of the patient or the essence and virtue of the illness and its excesses are gathered within it through the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are performed therein if there are few excesses and moisture, as with caustic for pain relief and similar effects, so that hardly any returning pain; but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many do not understand why caustic treatments are referred to as the "backbone" of medicine, but it's seen; however, they don't believe that caustics are worth after medical treatment because their understanding is false, and caustic treatments are considered the backbone of medicine for this reason: when we administer cures for any disease, these cures do not hold value, so we apply cauterization, and it holds.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And although caustic treatment is considered the backbone of medicine, it does not necessarily align with the understanding of the people (folz).
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient doctors said that caustic tools made of gold are more valuable than those made of iron, and they spoke only about the quality of the gold and the height of its substance; and they claimed that the tool of cauterization does not cause erosion, but this is not seen because I have experienced it, and in some people, and caustic tools made of gold are more useful than those made of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in everything where you heat an instrument of gold, you do not see it heated by the color of the gold, and if it is suddenly cooled; and if it is heated too much, then they burn at the fire, and thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use iron cautery that we have made apparent in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from the top down, so that the text is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Iron oval-shaped cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are made of moisture and cold, placed on the head, and in them there is caused by a disease called "soda," as well as by many humors descending to the top of the skull, ears, etc., due to numerous dreams and pain of density and throat, and most of all for all diseases that come from cold so similar to paralysis, stroke, and other similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that it clears the patient's pain by medicine resolving the third or fourth cause, according to what the virtue and effectiveness of the treatment on the malady allow it to withstand; and then they go back to the top of the malady.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then it fits between your hands, and put your hands on the pieces of wood; after that you place one palm's root over the other's root between its two fingers; when his blood comes out, ward off the cautery called "olivare," for from this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ink is put on his hand signifying writing, and you pull out your hands little by little, tearing them off; then let your hand rest, and reward the wound as much as it becomes an ivory fragment; and if you do not see any bone, you must continue using the cautery until you can see a fragment of bone like I told you; after that take some sinew, wrap it softly inside, and place on his hand; let it be for three years; afterwards put butter wrapped in cloth on it; allow it to warm up until the bone heals, as long as they call "tetrapharmacy."
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said the old ones that as long as you stay longer on the wound, it will purify more; and for this reason it is useful.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that you should relax the iron cautery enough to bruise it softer; and then treat him who has a bone fracture, and care for this bone.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	lore
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be very good in every aspect, fire that no man has ever had a reason to fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous moisture, as we have witnessed in other limbs; and regarding my own malformed shoulder, which is naturally feeble, and the first signs of cautery are more safe and flexible for me, and therefore I use this method.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	The principal pain from the incision
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the whole chief comes chronic pain that lasts long, and uses the malady's remedies called "cock-shells," and cleansing of the incision site, removal of oils and dressings; and if one does the cautery we have mentioned before, it is not.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's shoulder is of strong nature, and it not be too cold; otherwise, we will cauterize on top of the already mentioned cautery a little bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization under each bone of the incision site as we have said before, and placing a few "wattles" or clamps; and keep your hand away so that you do not see into the bone: the maladies feel much greater pain from this cautery than with other techniques, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary for those who perform cauterization on the horns to be more subtle than those who cauterize most of the incision site, which form is:
dou cautere dou chief	double cautery of the incision
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the incision comes sudden pain that spreads the disease further into the oil (tissue), and the shoulder is purified by universal medicines; and it has been done all other treatments I mentioned regarding the division of diseases, and none of this helps at all; therefore, make cauterizations according to two methods, which are medicine water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine water if it requires a dozen days for the scab to fall off and expose the bone; then you dole out one or two times as much as the shoulders, and treat the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can reapply the dozen days' poultices under the skin so that it rests well and leave it during twelve years. Then remove them and put cotton wool submerged under burnt oil; and then let it be left for three or four, as long as this text is:
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the purification when he is healthy; and if you find any of the burned remedies that I have written about or treated many burnt remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery until it takes on this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cross or with little curvature, and placed on the painful spot; and take your hand and restrain the fire slightly, so that most of the heat does not escape the wound; and let your hand be such that the burn does not occur elsewhere, and circulate abundantly blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying linen cloth to the wound and placing it for three years; then I apply moistened cotton in fat and treat the purified wound until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellate," at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not yield any benefits, and you see that the cultellate cautery before mentioned in medicine deals with fire but cannot touch iron; therefore, heat the cultellate cautery until it is white; then place a straight line half a dozen spans long on the next lower spot, and hold your hand once, so as not to cover the artery and let it move along the bone; warn against a silent jaw when moving that does not make noise or tremors in the patient's face, and protect the nerves from being affected by muteness and spasms in a maladjusted state. Also warn about the drainage of blood from the artery once it is opened, or opening with great risk and concern; let me leave you to your way; but I will tell you how sanguineous substances are handled when the artery has been opened, and I will show in this book where such a sign appears on the page.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not affect the disease, and the patient suffers from it, then cauterize as we have said previously in the same context, and treat the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, apply the cautery that we or the chirurgical barber have mentioned for artery extraction, with a cautery equipped with two knives; and this type of cautery is better than any other and most helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears colder parts.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain arises in the ear due to cold, and it has been treated with remedies that we have discussed in this division of treatments, and the pain does not cease, therefore heat this cautery called "pokes" until its shape is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After poking all the maladies of both ears, and then remove it slightly above the ear root; and make it so with ten poins on each ear until it is healthy. Then treat the purified wound.
de la torture de la bouche	Of cauterizans. Seur leu emmeintes, et ceux les pele cueillent chefeil t’est curé de la pei:ment. It is toche.saint lesbien ayeitre pei desormen the French.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	i:cause:
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this deafening torture caused by the flow of yellow dust and secretions from the head, and since it doesn't amount to much, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. (two) cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little further back in the temple, and the third on the alignment of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that is still healthy, and apply it to the head's upper part above a little from the hard core of the head, and another one in the temple just as far outward as some poke, and let the cauterization last until the moisture dries on the wound; this is how you should use the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the subtler form of the cutlass that we have used before, but it should be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously mentioned, until it heals completely.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, there's no benefit to be gained, nor does the sick person have a fever; nevertheless, you must perform .iiij (three) cauterizations: three on top of the two hard cores, one under the head, and another called "wattles" in our previous discussion, as we mentioned before, and treat it accordingly. And treat the wound there below the mouth of the stomach; do so as previously described.
de litargie	Of antimony (litargiria)
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This disease requires you to give the patient long years and potent pills that will cleanse the brain; afterwards, he treats the head of the patient completely, and places the spine implant made from black pepper (written about or described in plasters) on the back of the skull; and this is how you should perform cauterization: as I have previously mentioned.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If the wound is healed like that, it's good; and if it isn't, then you must perform .iij (three) cauterizations on the sides of the head, descending just above the collarbone, with a space of .i. (.one) fistful of thick material between each cautery; and treat it as for other wounds, if you find any additional discomfort in the patient, then perform another cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, others on top of the two horns, and continue treating until healed. And this is called "olive tree" cautery, as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	Of coldness at the head (froidor dou chief)
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It requires that the head be purified by years and everything we have previously mentioned; after treating the patient's head completely, then he places the cautery on top of the head, under each horn, two in the spinal cord at the neck, and if you have more skill, and the sick person is moist, and the disease is very severe, so he performs .iiij (three) cauterizations on the spinal cord of the back; and let his hand. And then treat it until healed completely; and this one called "olive tree" cautery that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	s :twitchime: httpsighreis.cestiqu56:2000e (theuppeurge: and itacount:sesque, assobtique:se:trolet:suforange;lore:nagre aye deiticlex proucheinti.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The lice should not use fiery cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first clarify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the malady is large and suffering from medicine treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, he shall make gargling and chewing to clarify the brain often with tender meats; after that he will apply .i. cautery as we have said before, and .i. cautery on his thighs, and on every horn; and if the malady is very severe and suffering, he shall perform cauterizations as I have described to one who has paralysis and muscle weakness in the spine and neck, and apply cautery olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	And if the malady is an infant, he shall perform .i. cautery in this subtle way:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the cause of melancholy there are excess or corrupted moistures and thick phlegm, accordingly the piece-cauterization we have mentioned to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy there are declining excesses towards melancholy and the wet corpse is weakened by it, therefore he gives drink for the brain to be clarified according to what has been said before in this section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the malady; after making an iron or linen circle like a circle, so he puts it on the chief; and if the maladies are twisted, they must be well held in all parts; then the linen covering, made from old goat's burnt wool, is applied to the head of the malady at constant heat, so that it can suffer it. After removing the circle part by part around the chief and letting it cool down, he does this treatment once a week with other beneficial governance as long as the maladies are cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see that the head of the malady is subjected to more than one piece of cauterization, this method softens the brain much; and then he puts cotton wadding in linen and lard made from a hedgehog.
de l’awe des eulz	from the nails
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the first signs appear as I have said in this section; and then he begins to drink water for the malady, and it is forbidden to him and he does bleed several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	ses cecele (which.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and cutting the caulis, as you will squeeze them; and never have we done a cautery or piercing behind those two bones.
dou cors des larmes	Corner of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and customary and are under the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the face's surface; and we see it is superfluous cold humoral fluids, as I said at the beginning of my lowering the eyeballs: first cauterize the head, and then two cauters on the temples, and then three cauters around those two bones; and if there is a need more, they will cauterize above the suture with every small cauter.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Corner of tears between the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When the medicine as we have said in the division does not benefit at all, but rather causes harm to three naughty children; afterward he lowers the head and makes a bloodletting with one or two sticks called "ovilear", and then performs three cauterizations of what is called "clavicula" under those two sutures, and warns you from the artery that you must not touch.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the shape of the cauter that is called "clavicula":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the oil paper is softened by disease and moisture, therefore, the bloodletting with this cautery called "olivare" that has such a shape. Because of which there it is:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see making two cauterizations under those two sutures as well as the sutures themselves; and do not let your hand go without keeping it there until three-quarters of the paper has been burned, according to how I have said before.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Two hairs which indicate the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never has the hairs of the oil turned red and burned, and they hold it with fire; and he does it thus: that is to say, whether by fire or fierce medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	ge esle (Ice:age. Ages comfaire. Ilte.combrein.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and equal in size, then the doctor puts it on your health; after that he writes on a paper above their ears a figure as if the little flame had been there or began the sign next to the hairs; then he wets cotton moistened with oil and musk near the skin, then shapes the fire cautery accordingly:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization of the figure you have signed and signaled little and often, so that it remains red in place; and the signs of your health are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for two years, then moistened cotton is placed on burlap until he warms up completely. Afterward, bathe with warm water so that it becomes healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come back and the paper becomes soft again, then repeat the cautery on that spot as you have done before; and if the hairs are gone, continue to cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, is even and does not prick at the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot cauteries of medicine command that you let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of paper from the sheet of myrtle; take one-and-a-half spoonfuls each of soap and fine brass, grind them together well; do it hastily so it does not cool down, then sprinkle it on top of the form made with the myrtle leaf, and place it over the paper where you put the hairs; and if the disease is in only one oil, then treat both at once; and apply cotton moistened with wax to the oil; and let your malady be healthy again and show on the medicine two finger widths, and press a little bit every time when you feel a sensation of heat from the medicine, as it also feels like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done that for a long time, if the medicine has taken effect on your need.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the sensation of heat is no longer present, lift up the oil layer as if it had been lifted by the force of fire or incision; and if so, it is well done. If not, you still put medicine on your oil or the medicine has not worked yet, as long as your limbs are equal in size and the hairs are at a point; then place cotton moistened with burlap until the redness arises again under the layer of warmth which is called "dafenis" and others, so that it becomes healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you have learned that you must care for your work well so that it does not reject the medicine in the hairs. If the paper becomes soft again, and the hairs prick at the oil, then resume the treatment on that spot as they are mollified with the paper; afterward, bathe until he is healthy. And this is the shape of the fire flame:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And knowing that the size of men varies greatly in height and smallness, and according to this, it should be determined by the constraints set upon him; and not necessarily restored to the right path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The treatment of a fistula using cauterization.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When curing a fistula as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, yet it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your safe position; and hold him upright with your hands so that he does not move or get hurt, afterwards put moistened cotton inside a clean cloth under his arm or on top of olive oil; afterwards perform cauterization according to this technique: and the patient's head is shaped like an arrowhead, gather it together if you apply the cautery; if you see any contact between one side and another, and if you see a patchwork-like appearance; but in all cases, such treatment holds value for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula when it is open and removing its exudate, and drying it; if it is closed, perform this operation and remove any remaining wound sutures; after applying hot cautery resembling a needle's head, hold your hand at the part underneath the oil where your hands should not act foolishly; and apply the cautery in the oil fat, which you will corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you start the cautery right at the bone, it would be better. If not, then restart the cautery once more if you have experience in doing so, and leave it for 2 years; afterwards apply moistened cotton wrapped in cloth, and treat the drying oozing wound as long as it remains healthy, and for another 40 years until the bone is exposed. This procedure follows what would come according to your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of treating a fistula that none of the ancient doctors mentioned. When dealing with an abscess, and opening it up; after creating a small incision in the cavity where its shape can be seen:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and apply the quantity of about .З. of molten wax; hold your hand or small camahan tightly so that no painful nerve moves at all, because the melted fat does not return to its oil; it is necessary to place moistened cotton in a clean cloth undernee his arm or on top of olive oil: this wax forms the head of the fistula and ensures superb healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed with the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then administer a syringe to the cavity and bring back the fistula to its place according to what it requires in his own way.
des crevaices en levres	And draw cracked veins.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracked lips called "hairs," especially in children's mouths.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you heal these cracks as we have discussed in sections, and the treatment does not work, instead it worsens.
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And you apply haste to those cracks while they still form; after the treatment, ensure that the joints are healed completely.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the incision on the thigh
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the incision is made in the thigh root or on the uve (eye), or in the roots of the teeth, after there has been rot and rupture, and it becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have described in divisions, but it does not improve. However, it requires that you use a scalpel according to the size of the fistula; after opening the fistula'e sore, hold your hand firmly until the bone heals at its base, and where the lower leg is; and perform these steps once or twice more after curing what we have described in treatments, until it has healed completely. And if cured as such, it is good; but if not, you must discover the underlying bone and remove the diseased bone according to what your chaplain finds.
dou movement des dens	movements of the teeth roots
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the roots of the teeth move, you cure them with medicine, but that does not suffice; therefore place a tight band on your head. After removing the cautery which forms after this treatment in part like how you would apply a pack to the tooth, hold it firmly during application, and keep your hand there until the painful heat from the root of the tooth reaches out. Release your hand then, and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after that fill the mouth with saliva, and let the inflammation last for an hour or so before removing the packs.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in the manner that the moving teeth roots are confirmed, and the softened gums restricted, and the corrupted moistures cleansed.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain in the teeth roots
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	"cautere d’un maundr'eveignement des'aivres en l'estatifs par escript :et sanc com aicourtie ceu durement, et il nen:er aime ancornein itens dele neils : "Aurant,re devenentures. offeres theuccles of ittears :meintroil'sans theuere.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	sainages to la 1 heurichleurs l'arouter :3oreuissevise a grewisalecekanalimenteweelies the cruignevelo
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The collective fire instruments are such that you need a piece of iron or lead, and it should be large enough so that the flames do not blow away from the patient's face; after the heat, this instrument will form thereafter, and you place it on the teeth with your hand until the instruments cool down. Do this often, because the pain will then be felt either in the same day or the next morning. And it must be that the patient fills his mouth with good fodder quickly in the hurry of this instrument, and then he is purged; and this is the form of this cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on the head that you wish, and according to what you may desire; and this is the shape of the instrument:
des scrophules	and leprosy
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When leprosy is of slimy and cold moisture, and it does not respond to digestion with medicines, then you shape the cautery iron by heating; place openings on one side for the fumes to escape from the cautery; put the cautery at the mouth of the abscess once or twice, depending on how much there is, and let it move until the abscess ceases moving; and if the abscess is small, you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three years; then cover with cotton soaked in wool until the arthritis has subsided.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture overcomes the channels of the palate and particularly when it comes from cold temperatures, then it must first be treated with soluble medicines by the patient; afterward you apply cautery to the root of the throat, making sure not to touch the neck or cause a burn but just a little. After that, you make another cautery at the junction of the collarbone and the spine's head, which we have called "clavile"; and treat the wound as we have described previously until it is healed.
de la toust	of the stroke
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the palate are moist and cold, and there is no fever in the patient, and it is an ancient disease, you make two cauteries on the muscle with previously used wires; another cautery removes a piece between the breasts; and that which we call "clavile" according to the form described above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, apply the instrument of fire called "poin" which is here in the disease of the ears; and let these points be just thereabouts or so long as they last; after curing the wound according to what has been said above, and that it is applied for three times:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you use .iij. crowns.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	When analyzing the frequency and impact of shoulder dislocations within an occupational health study focusing on assembly line workers:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder joint is displaced due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly displacing with slight movement as we have seen, then you must first address the displacement.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the pain is pressed on his back and on his chest; after lightly feeling the lump that lies deep in the tissue between the ribs with your left hand, if it dislodges within, then you should apply a heating stick of .ij. nodes shape to this area:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And then the lump should be burned as long as it remains in the chest, and the smoke from the fire rises together with .iiij. sticks of cautery; for this is how cauterization is performed with the stick that has .iij. nodes, so these are the number of sticks used, according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of a stick with .iij. nodes:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And there is never any adjustment made on that .i. nerve, so it has .viij. cauteries:
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery with rope and bandage; after allowing the patient to rest, and ensure that his limbs are not disturbed for a long time until he is well-supported:
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, the consequences are minimal; however, perform cauterization on the thick layer of cautery underneath the clavicle, or by pressing many sticks therein. Because the joint has been referred, and moisture has accumulated, resulting in sore pain:
dou cautere de pleuresin	Do not refer to a stick used for treating pleurisy:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	According to the ancients, pleurisy should be treated with root sticks of Aristoglossum, and in this manner: take one such stick that is the largest you can find; dry it or make it as long and thick as you deem necessary; coat it with oil, apply a fire on the spot between his armor and his collarbone, and then add .ij. sticks to the area below his chin; and .ij. cauteries beneath his fifth rib, and then some more, and one each in declining slightly in his forearm; and .iij. sticks on either side of his calfes, and .iiij.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	suret, lec.comme itin ate:
de la mice	of moisture
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of dampness because we have said in our discussions about treatments, and it does not help at all, for indeed they use three kinds of heat applications that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	From which method do you apply two or three burns depending on the length of the dampness, and according to the size and shape of the cautery wound that we have previously mentioned; and never press your hand onto the entire cauterized area, but rather on both sides of it.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cautery is to heat the instrument with two or three notches as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of a shoulder; and warm the point where the dampness is located, either on the side from which the pain originates, or the direction it tends towards, and raise the heated point according to its location, length, and width.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After you blow the two or three notches and heat it to where they are perceived from another side, then thrust the instrument, and thereby it has three; if you see a patient who needs complete treatment of that area with three notches. Then after curing when he suffers from long-term discharge, this is considered equivalent to one of the treatments previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	from disease (referring back to "dislocation" in previous context)
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not effective on its own for this reason because it stirs "asclytes" or fermentation within the body; when you apply our methods of treatment as discussed in our divisions, and your cure does not yield results, but it requires that you perform three burns around the discharge, one on the abdomen, one on the liver, one under the dampness, and two behind the spine, near the kidney; and place the cautery well close to the spot of inflammation.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	ounsume dues, etisentre desmeinantilentures ande laisse deins tostotre thekes deignent. Aid invis-laisse thekes devellocture. Aold.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The fire cautery should have the shape of a key for the abdomen; and he who does it for the back should do it on the shoulder blade, as shown before us here.
de l’enfleure des piez	Swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen due to ydropic (presumably "iodous" or iodine-related condition), and they are covered in yellowish spots, it is required that you perform cautery on the back of the hand between the little finger and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery while not entering too deeply, so as to avoid burns from the yellowish substance, and carry out the cauterization according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing it on both legs at the tip of the cutting blade; and you perform the cautery along the length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, within the leg; and let the cauteries run over long enough for them to work out, which will drain the substance; after treating the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of medication
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the ventricular solution comes from cold and moisture, as it impairs both retaining and digestive virtues of the stomach and in the intestines is inflamed, and cannot be treated by any means; see the patient suffering greatly with intense strength, then you make one strong cauterization on the stomach according to what he has said here before; and four delicate cautions undernee a single caution at the belly button; and three cautions on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moistures accumulating and the patient suffering, then you perform one strong caution on the scrotum, and one small caution on each side; and three small cautions on the stomach near the large, as the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of hemorrhages treatment
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhages are the foundation or one or more, and they are ancient and large, cold, moist, rotten humors, and they are divided as we have said here beforehand, and it does not benefit at all if you perform cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, which is behind the navel point; and one cauterization under the belly button, two others.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	ilumine adore le parole theuccle devisible: The French. Amenodexac's fei. Allitent. Eldes aura: "thexent's, le :er andromainde laisse of course fromage. Inbraccles. Iustin.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the choleric temperament which is called "thélul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	If you cope with the choleric temperament, wield the scourge that appears as an iron-hot blade, and then place it above this choleric temperament in such a way that your hand remains unscathed until the blade grows from its birth; let it do so once or twice, and if it has much choleric temperament, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward perform healing rites as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great hot iron, there will be more aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of wounds badly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or piercing, let us tell it in its own words, there comes a sickness that no one can heal except with cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no fistula present and it has become swollen and filled with rotten moisture, let the treatment be carried out in its entirety as much as the affected area requires; after scraping like a rake upon that quantity which entered into the fistula, continue using the scraper until those pus-filled abscesses have been removed once, twice, or thrice, according to the extent of the necessity. Then warn you against burning nerves and great cables therein; do not cause harm to such channels merely by chance; after treatment, ensure that the channel is healthy again, and if its lining is ossified for a distance, then you know it has been fully healed; and if the materials are bones long in length, and cartilage present, then you know the fistula is completely cured. And similarly to those things we shall explain later on.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When frozen pain comes with heavy winds and it takes much from women, then you must make caution upon one part of the rains and another at the clavicle that we have mentioned before; if your causticization in general is done by means of thirty such instruments, then there will be more aid.
de la vessie	Regarding the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weakened by pressure and moisture, so that it retains urine, then he shall perform a cauterization on the lower part above the bladder, whereby the hair begins to curl towards both sides, and each one with such cautery in its nose as they would do; and let him cauterize backwards, or if you have need of it, there are two ways: either he shall cauterize the back, or the clavicle according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	Translation for "de la marris" not applicable as it does not appear in Old French medical texts related to medieval medicine. It might be a misinterpretation or typo of an actual line from an older text. Therefore, no accurate translation can be provided without the proper context or correct phrase.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their ends delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: therefore he must perform three cauterizations around the swelling, as we have said about the bladder, and two on the backside, and also cauterize the clavicle according to what we have stated.
de la hainche	Translation for "de la hainche" not applicable in this context either since it is an unrelated term and may indicate a typo or misinterpretation of actual Old French medical terminology pertaining to medieval medicine. It could potentially refer to 'of the hunchback' which relates more to physical deformity than medical procedure, but without further context, we cannot provide an accurate translation within the scope of historical medical practices.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hunchback's joint, causing it to move from its place and showing that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and where you find the detached part of the joint, it must be cauterized on the hunchback's joint with such a cautery as if resembling a circle, and in front of the joint within the hunchback so that the joint turns like those previously cautioned for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present for you, then he shall perform three large cautions from the olive tree, and also shall do so as all the others have done; and let it be well-cared-for until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Translation: The pain of the hunchback's joint, which may refer to the discomfort experienced due to a misaligned or dysfunctional spinal structure affecting mobility and causing localized pain in the region commonly associated with 'hunchback'. This text likely describes symptoms that could lead to various treatments including cauterization.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the joint of the hunchback and it is due to coldness and moisture, and this affliction must be cured as we have said about its division; and its treatment does not suffice, and this disease is ancient: therefore he must purge the malady from these heavy humors with foul-tasting pills or other similar bones.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	: le cautere cestan leu auceil XIIIe, si enlissus. Qu'on cetera XXIIj.XIII theor: Iesme. Ache sachte lix ofere,le a laisser leuillei; lorescripture.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, when he cauterizes the circle as we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hernia; but do it partially so that the circles contain all of the hernia, and all its edges are hard like iron.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And that is how it's done in the sciatic nerve when the pain is located in the hernia and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; if it reaches the thigh and leg, he makes .ij. cauterizations where the patient indicates that the pain is, and .i. cauterization above the ankle .iiij., on the left side a little; and either cuticle cauterizes, and sometimes bruises harden; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two or three inches from where it felt, then he cauterizes there for .i. or .iiij. points on the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is proper, he does more; and when the pain is located under the jaw toward the thigh, he makes cauterizations with a cuticular or circular cautery, ensuring that in all your cauterizations you do not let the cautery burn too much so as to injure nerves and large arteries, and cause no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have heard of several who performed cauterization on the piece above the pain, and left it until the leg was completely relaxed, and also the ankle, and all the pieces were seen and rotten. After a stomach solution which he died from.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in .ij. parts assembled, do it on one and on the other according to this manner. // The surgeon said in the cauterization of the hernia, that's how you should make it, .i. iron pieces and either as big as a nail or slightly smaller, or by slits between them spaced by about the length of an inch; and place the slits over each other, with approximately .ij. inches apart, and they look like needles, and have one handful of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And should it be heated so that it becomes all red and tender, and then place it on the sick hernia of the patient, turn it over the healthy side; the cauterizer performs .i. cauterizations repeatedly and leaves for .iij. years; and make a plaster of wax, and leave the wound exposed for long periods until healed after the treatment with oil.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim said that we use only a little of this cauterization for the patient's sake and if there are few who use it; and all in all, these are good cauteries which can endure suffering without complaint.
de la dolor dou dos	of two-point pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When the pain comes out of cold au dedent de l'oreille, et au coi se liens ceaile: "ses armes ouyseigneurs desuccle encolures laissier les maltreme d’aurois entorne pasce encomprendre.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	n deffle citer queimbret enceure.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	naginea:decomprectiforent
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it and see to heal it, if you cauterize with the caustic of that cell according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the purple caustic touches each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, cauterize along the spine with a pointed instrument in two or three lines, and place them close together. After curing it until it is sound according to what we have said, and warn you not to use caustics covered in nerve fluid.
de la dolor des jointes	of pain at joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain at joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb'e and when it comes in a cramped form they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is cold-caused and cannot be cured with medicine, then this must be cared for partially: make the purple caustic enter at the joint of the foot, and place the pointed instrument oval according to this shape.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need for you to pierce the face of the foot, and place cautery on all the caustic that calls it "point," and when pains wander down into the genitals and other joints, and this often happens, then make cautery in each one of the three or four parts of every joint, with the entire pointed instrument; and if you have to do more, but hold your hand firmly only until the arthritis has disappeared.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pain descends down to the genitals and back, then apply the caustic that we have mentioned in our chapter. If the pain is in the hands, make points along the vein of two or three lines; and if there remains no pain on any joint, make points on each joint and on the hairs of the hand. And if the pains come down to the hips or shoulders, cauterize every part, and govern carefully the patient and his medicines. For if you do this well and purge mucus, it will heal with God'e help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the process of sycophancy
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	If the routine comes in anger, and the belly descends into the joints, it must be that when you see to heal him, you do not make him cry for three days; and you use things which lay open his stomach so that food may come out of his belly. Then have him sit on your back between your hands, and command him to draw a line until the joints are repaited. And mark anoint on one side as if it were a sign of three-quarters of a circle above their shoulder; then strike with the caustic in that form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Let the hairs grow long and flat until they shed; then reset them to their place; and the attendants color their hands so that they do not return to their original position; and work well on the thigh of the patient, and put an iron pin and a strap under it, and another one beneath it which paints his hands; then apply the cautery over all your hand, and the right side and the left side until you touch the bone, and if you do not touch the bone in the first attempt, he may return to it several more times while you are still with the bone; and warn subtly that the hair does not rise when you apply the cautery, or else burn him, or else harm him.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you must know that when the cautery does not touch the bone with it, your efforts are worthless; and it is necessary to cauterize children's ears gently according to their size, and large people also large according to their size; after three years treat his ear with a burnt cautery until he has scalded the ossicles; afterwards treat him with other ointments so that he becomes healthy again, and rest for forty days on his back until the wound is well set. And it is necessary for them to lie still long enough so that the hair does not rise when they get up from bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	: and thearumbrein versail.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the journey of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When other dislocations come into play and are known, and you see that they no longer increase, he does some fire cautery according to its quantity, and either one-third of the heat; after curing as we have mentioned; and none of the ancients said it must be cauterized at three angles following this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign is at the entrance and make a line above the route for its width, and another below it; and hold your hand near all the fire cautery. But the initial cauteries are heavier and more vigorous. (Note: This translation interprets the Old French text as describing steps in treating dislocations with fire cautery. Without full context, this interpretation is speculative.)
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in no limb, or from a fall or injury, and that pain lasts long, and the treatment of medicine is not worth it, therefore it must be cauterized with the "pins" (a type of medical instrument), and make the fire cautery according to the length, size, frailty, strength, location of twists and sprains, as well as its pain; if it's healed after the first cautery, that's good enough. However, it is customary for it to change in the limb close at hand, so you must continue making the cauteries until the patient feels better.
de meselerie	of mediation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	.i'amende deuin aiains :ainsi curant :l'itge, siat. AI'a litter written. Old French ita theit.comme inca.nobtains :all :iatient. In English: The Old-olden. Icelike inatominum asaprise in theithes ail fromage.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	iere:sseuille the thiscipher so 13usther to the
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you know that the more I perform cauterization, the more help I give, and he benefits; and you know that the painless burns do not hurt the sick as much as healthy people feel, because their bodies are already corrupted. And it is required that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you find in the methods of working iron. After treating his body with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until he is healthy.
de enfleure	The text "de enfleure" does not provide enough context or content to translate into a meaningful English sentence, as it appears to be either an incomplete word or phrase in Old French. Please provide additional information for translation.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to no limb and is treated with medicines and oils, and it's not cured according to the size of the limb; and sometimes they do a small incision near the edge of the wound where there is an immobile nerve, then treatments are given until healed. And never made a cautery on the hand or foot or back, at the site of the nerve that makes the swelling so, and in any case no one meddles with such things unless they know about limbs and moving nerves within the body's movement.
de albaras	The text "de albaras" seems to be an incomplete phrase or word. In Old French, "albaras" refers to barley (grain), but without context, it cannot be accurately translated into a line of English prose. Please provide more information for translation.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	The disease that attacks the barley is aged, and the art of medicine does not help at all, so they cauterize it with a small amount of fire according to the size of the burn, until the scorched area becomes stone-like, and then treat with flour mixed several times with lentils, olive oil roasted in plantain leaves, blood from pigs and ducks (for each part), and all together either moistened or wrapped in a cloth, or applied to the wound until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of sores by cauterization: When dealing with sores treated by cauterization, it is important to consider the size and severity of the lesion. Cauterization should be used as a last resort when other treatments have failed. It involves carefully applying heat or chemicals to destroy the affected tissue. However, this method can lead to scarring and must be performed by an experienced medical professional.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore comes at the beginning and you see to stop it, if you cauterize with a circle-shaped cautery that encompinas the entire circumference of the sore. And everyone said they also made cauteries in the midst of the sores; but this doesn't seem right to me because I fear it might become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen any such practice before; and more righteous thing is that they should be treated around with a circle-shaped cautery called "circule," as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The swelling which cannot die refers to persistent or chronic inflammation that does not resolve spontaneously and may require medical intervention such as medications, surgery, or other therapies depending on the underlying cause. Chronic inflammatory conditions need careful assessment by healthcare professionals for appropriate management strategies.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Some have a disease called "adubelati," and it is delayed to die or due to the superfluity, or for its weakness (that means too much hair), and you see withhold: butter; afterward cauterized in many small cauteries around it shallow. Therefore it will continue to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	thees enge nece tounsure cepe of maladye.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	s: the whole. Theursafeiures.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens," and it's essentially an inflammation of the limb because it affects the limbs just like dry fire does; if you see this disease in front, since it may suffer from cautery together with fire, then mildly but strongly strike the clavicle nails according to what is required at that point or by the nature of the disease; after cauterizing all parts until there's no trace left of corrosion, and nothing remains of it except everything that was corroded should be osteotomized. And then let it rest for three years, and have them cauterize with oil as much as possible so the burn areas heal completely, and all the corrosion is removed. After this treatment of medicinal emanations; and if after three years charred flesh does not regenerate properly, that's good; but if it doesn't, then reapply cautery to those limbs that are still suffering from corrosion. And this inflammation has never been treated by medicine in the joint of a cauterized area with fire; all other treatments involving fire for cautery are much more helpful, and I have already said about the treatment for the division: take as much as you have practice with.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Diseases that arise at the points.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	There are times when the points by distant causes a malady called "closed," according to our understanding, and is a great thing that breaks the point; the treatment for this disease is in two manners: Fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery should be applied as if it were an iron pen tip and made of good iron so that the nail can fit well to all parts, and have very thin margins; after setting the temperature of the lynx, turn your hand around the point until it becomes bent at the lynx. Then let it rest for three years while there is a recurrence of rusty rot; then make an infamous trap made from known vile fruits broken with rope and leave the trap over all night, and the pins will be extracted from their roots. Finally heal the limb by using medicinal emanations engraved charred smoke.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are displaced by opposing forces of their bodies, and many times occur in hands and feet, it requires that you heat the patient with a hot caustic; and it is done this way: take an iron or copper needle, or a nail from a roof tile, and place it on the pin and peg, i.e., for calluses; and put the needle so that it penetrates deeply, then you place a little bit of hot caustic, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning until the edge of the needle reaches the root of the pin, and may find the way to heat very deep down to the root; and suffer the maladies for a short time this heating with hot caustic, then let it be so, and all its roots will regenerate. So do another one, as long as you treat all those in the body that are affected by these conditions.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When any one trembles from cold or nervousness, or fever quartan, it requires that you do: four cauterizations on the backbone of the spine, one between each vertebra; and one at the belly with a caustic for the gallbladner, and let the patient tremble, and this will help restore health from cold-induced malady.
des pustules puans	of purulent lesions
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	There has been no appearance of purulent lesions or pustules stemming from large decayed substances. When such appear, it requires that on each head of the pustule you perform cauterization: one delicate caustic with fir wood shavings, charred at the point by fire or root of astragalus along, or a lenticular caustic; and not once have they been cauterized at the beginning when observed in this manner, but rather disintegrated the superfluous matter from which they stemmed, and are healthy; however, it requires that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the arrow is extracted
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound occurring in the parietal fissure or incision of the aposteme, or during cauterization of a limb, and such things happen; and it is very unfortunate to experience this.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case when it happens to you, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very much that they are no longer spouting; then take small or large fire caustic oculi caustice de la veinne, and tote tien the arterie estanent.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	leu parle en: aouttenoirs espace toun. Levira iles parlare outou. If thefeinster parle sutilexprescription of the feitner itera, ander. Outil;reversenturea une. Thepourmenture:terrain.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform this operation repeatedly until the limb is stiff; and guard that you do not inflame the nerve next to it, and prevent other maladies from affecting the afflicted area; and know that when blood flows out of an artery, it cannot rest well enough immediately afterward as long as the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated yet, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines applied that are capable of retaining blood. And let it be laid out and stretched regularly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will apply tight bandaging or other things placed on the limb, or similar practices if it does not yield results.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no sign of it and medicine has not been applied, then he should place his thumb on the vein wound as we have mentioned, stretching it above both the wound and the vein; and do not move the limb, but cool its moisture often until it becomes cold enough so that the limb freezes and congeals, and make preparations for what cautery and medicines are necessary.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This marks the beginning of the second volume on treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	As we have said in the first chapter of this book, all diseases require fire or medicine, and questions and causes and preparations and forms of cauteries; and I have included that chapter here at the beginning, and I will continue on this path to make it more comprehensinate for those who follow.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so I begin with that, the metal wire, which you should learn in this chapter has more danger and fear than the first cauteries, and for this reason it requires much care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision under an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and incision into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to do foolish things. For many people come in treatments who have worsened their condition due to the foresight and severity of what they did while dealing with their illness, and because of the magnitude of their sickness; therefore one must be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give their sign and say: "Wait, I am safe"; and the illness is stubborn. You do not need to allow people who come in with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your care, and avoid hastily rather than cautiously that which you are certain of, so as to convert their health into good reputation; and it will help this famous person, glory, and fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	And the metal wire, ours Sires you give good understanding and straight of your hand, in his blood.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or you have ordered this chapter by discussing it in sections according to what is before the book on cauterization, which I have described its main points as they are placed here, so that you find them more easily.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The main point full of moisture.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It comes often in children at birth, and when the band is tightened too much on the child's head; and there has never been a case where it was caused by another condition that we knew of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, and all of these that I have observed had their wounds heal; and for this reason it seems to me that the practice is more divided into parts regarding treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was filled with moisture, and the swelling grew every day so that it couldn't support itself; and they believed it to be mortal, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the suture, between the cortex and the bone; and the cauterization procedure is like this when the moisture is between the cortex and the bone, and the incision is small, you make a large cut in the head's center. And so it continues as long as the swelling goes down, until then the skull fracture forms:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is larger and the incision deeper, then make two large incisions shaped like a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the commissures above each part of it, and the moisture bursts when you press it with your hand between them; this has never been explained to me: it must be that you make incisions three times inside according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision is made and the swelling is drained through cloths and powders; then I pour wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then he lays down the patient, and treats the wound with bandages and ointments, and allows the head to restrain in a similar manner, and feed the malade dried meat from the moisture as long as the member is strengthened and becomes healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	: inacces ceux laisse une fois andante. Thisse the morale. What's akai, et cet. whatenlace. Commentaire ajustice decaisse. Theesque. Whichcause it’s- 2ndraince.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	When the incision is made and the wound is opened, and filling with water as you are able to do; and be careful not to cut an artery; and let blood flow from a limb so that the patient's painful discharge of blood begins gradually and does not abruptly.
de reume	In this instruction, "de reume" translates directly from Old French to Modern English as "from disease." However, without further context or surrounding text, it is difficult to provide a more detailed translation or interpretation. Therefore, the line-by-line translation for "de reume" would be:
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there comes a disease that attacks the catarrh in the throat or stomach, and the illness is long-lasting, and medical treatment does not benefit at all, rather it prolongs the suffering with this procedure of cautery which we catch by cutting into these two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is now necessary for you to cover the patient's painful discharge of blood; after rubbing his head with an abrasive cloth until the arteries become visible, then straighten out his neck with a piece of fabric covered in it; and look at whether the vein appears on either side of his ears, and they are replenished as much as possible; then mark the veins, then take one or both of them with a sharp spatula measuring .ij. parts from each other, so that he remains lying down until the bone is touched, and it expands through its width.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, throw the sharp spatula over the artery and cover it above, cutting as much as .ij. parts on top of it.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is touched, it jumps up continuously in a rising motion.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to touch, it is necessary that you measure a quantity of .ij. parts, then seal it and cut down to the bone; as much blood must flow from the wound so that it amounts to about .vj. parts; and perhaps slightly more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone by a point, cut away the edges without letting blood flow from the joints, then bandage the wound and apply heat until it heals.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When there is long-standing emigration, and aggraved catarrh, because of the tears and heat in temple deeds, and olden practices of medicine and all such as we have experienced, and cut out the arteries from temples and cauterize these veins: seizure.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	. ia de lisse.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	xibleux in himnagreunde:tres
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And the blood flows from two joints, just as many; and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two lines of double strong silk, so that no filth prevents healing during the treatment of the wound, and washing off the blood; then remove the excess that exists between those two joints at this moment, and if you see the work of the cutter close to the bone with the cautery so long as the joints are not covered. And it is the mutilation done by such a cautery when the patient has no fever and is of warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	And the cautery helps to finish the humors: for this is greater help with the humors.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And for the extraction of arteries he must fill his hand with a lot of cotton and place it well tied; and when you remove them, treat him with dry medicines that cause cooling until he is healthy again; and if there is no cortisone from the artery as much as you do in this work, hasten to cover the wound with cautery, or pour vitriol on it and strain it with your hand so that the pain subsides; and if you have not such a present, put your utmost efforts until the blood has cooled completely several times in cold water, and then restrain it as much as it needs to be done according to this caustic treatment, cutting into two parts of .ij., but with great care so that its heat lasts longer and protects more against burning.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	And if the incision is too delicate, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And between the knives, it must have a great deal of space, and when you find that your incision has opened the joints, and then with hot iron on it as much as possible while still to the bone, and remove the vein in .ij. spaces; and separate them so they are not joined by this caustic treatment, for it is never completely fused of all in every part; and this form of cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And if the tears are draining from under the veils that constitute the chief test of the feverish sweat, and it does not profit medicine as they have made him ill, and you see the patient's face with movement as much like a cold; and those papers are held tightly and moist, and scorched the papers of the ardor of these tears, so that this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	négre comme ilice.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood from his wound, then thrust the cautery into about two parts of its size where this form is located:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision just below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the scar tissue that is between these two holes on top of which the bone lies, then make another small incision just above the other second one, and then extract this caustic.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If thrust the instrument called "cultellum" into the first fissure, and it is very well shaped on one side to scrape away a portion, and on the other side it is smooth, not scraping, and this is its shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting edge towards the scarred area of the wound, and the smoothed edge toward the bone, and thrust it as much in until to the next fissure, and make another incision in that first fissure just up to where the opening is still continuous; then extract the flesh evenly, and express the wound for the blood taken out; put a tape of many cotton threads in one fissure and cover it with moistened linen and oil and hay, ensuring that no stitches come loose; and after three days, make large water drainage holes, then apply basilic cream with olive oil and other treatments for wounds as long as the patient is sound.
dou reume des eulz	And remove the threads
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no one has a sharp fever that lasts and you see the threads tightly held in place, and impair vision, and burned papers; and their hair stands on end, and at the top of this pain there is burning, and the internal heat intensifies, and it becomes difficult to breatinate; therefore knowing from these events that such materials do not come about as a result of one or two ways, but rather many voices, and the treatment given by the master should be this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And order the patient to place his forehead downwards, then make a large incision on his front just below it, and another one slightly wider; approximately three points. Start from the temple's left side towards the right temple, making sure not to touch the temples that move when eating; when the bone is exposed, clean out all blood with an sponge, then place many cotton threads between these two fissures and cover them with linen tapes moistened in wine and oil, ensuring no sutures fall off; once healed, it will need to be treated with excising remedies that cause the bone to start regrowth, then continue such treatments.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a manner thus: take two parts of the flour of wheat, and four parts of chaff, and make an emplaster on these wounds to tighten them throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Dislocation of the ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that causes dislocation of the ears is one of four things: grains or beasts, or stones and similar things as hard as iron, or something fluid like water and silk and such things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it hurts in the ear piece or any other way that doesn't fit well with the ear, and if there is growth or a tumor in the ear, then perform an extraction; and do external compression on the chest, and clear the nostrils when compressing comes, and put pieces of linen or wool under the ears; and hold the ear above. Often this cure causes harm; if it does not work, then extract with fine pincers, and in doing so, consider its shape:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps up with the pincers, that's good; if not, then extract a small double extraction from the onychum; and if it does not jump with this, bind an arrow to the nail or the hole in the ear, and remove what is inside the cinnamon wax so that nothing can enter through it with the cinnamon wax; then treat accordingly, as we have said before many times; and if it doesn't jump up like this, take some glue from the spider webs, gather a few spiders, and put in any instrument you think might be suitable for doing so, and place a little cotton inside. Then press the glue on the nail or something similar, and treat accordingly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump with all these things that we have mentioned before, then you should fracture the ear so that the abscess will open and spasm; and the way of the fracture is to make a first stitch on the cephalic vein, then extract the blood according to its quantity, place the wound between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small crack at the root of the ear with oil or fat depending. And make the crack as round as a crescent moon, until it reaches the hole in the ear; and let the doctor do what is best according to his judgment, and suck the blood hastily from your mouth; and continue treatment until healing has taken place.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grain and it swells, then perform an extraction; and if it cannot be removed, then prepare a small fine syringe according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and perform an incision on that grain. But do not imagine that the grain is moistened due to ear mold, even if you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine pincers and suction, as we said, so that the extractions are light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	: allit.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	s :secondece,c'accure toutre illexentefinsiègue.tzetepe charjaccommege tande.gare siamexe. Fromente.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of ingrown toenails from ears, when you treat it as we have described in the division and treatment of distillations, it does not benefit at all; it is required that you look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no nits, gently scrape them off with tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the thorny horn present here in this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if it is narrow and wide above. And apply the subtlest part of medicine in the ear according to the degree of suffering from the patient's malady, then form the thorny horn so that all its parts are covered; do this often enough until everything comes out. If they do not come out, wipe the cotton horn as I have described on page 23, and if they do not protrude as we have mentioned, try distillations previously tried in cutting into ingrown toenails, and you will find or treat with distillations; and when applying oils and medicines to the ear using all this instrument, here is its form as you can see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is made of silver or gold and narrow at the bottom to .i. small hole, and above for distillation; and for pressing within the distillation with a well-made cloth, and if you see a razor and wrap cotton around its tip accordingly, then pour your oil or juice into the thorny horn, and what medicines are in that horn, and place the horn inside the ear; then press everything thoroughly in all the cotton until the liquid has distilled from the ear; feel the malady within it, and apply such distillations .i. little at a time to heat it up for distilling into the ear; and make sure it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good if it were too cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear cleaning
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And no child is born with any thorn in their ears; and this practice occurs among people as a result of ear wounds or scars within the ear, and these cleanings do not happen very often in the ear if they cannot be seen; and there have never been any few instances where the thorn was removed from the ear, and it healed well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And those which do happen without being seen require various treatments, and in those it is required that you put the maladyous ear to the sunlight; and look inside: if there is an apparent operation, then this treatment has a complete space of cotton as described here.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it is both before and behind the same plain, if it does not bleed the ear; if the operation is from a child's wound or injury to the ear, if you make gentle pinchings, and move them slowly until they are all of bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	ses.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for no day until the wound is sealed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and powder with vitriol; if you see blood coming from the ear, they must move the tent and rub another dampened tent made of oil roses and wax, until the bleeding stops; then heal him so that it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the blood is coming from the wound, then we dip an sponge and drape it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are either for distillation or treatment.
de la char des papieres	From the paper lining
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This instruction is related to handling bandages made from paper when they become wet and dry:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	This line refers to the process of treating a swollen limb without dissection and applying continuous cauterization with an instrument called "cautere lenticulaire" after making an incision that should not move; this is repeated many times until nothing remains in their roots, and when they are treated by fire, these root branches become charred and do not return.
de la gresle	The phrase "de la gresle" does not appear to fit within the context of this medical text and could be a mistake or misinterpretation from an old French term related to clothing or fabric:
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Often times come on papers the things that seem clumsy in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "great snow", and its treatment is as follows: take care that the great snow does not move from one side or another, and it is a simple matter to know; make him then a wide cut, then scrape each part lightly, then with pinches, and bandage. If you cannot cover the paper with any sense of piercing a little bit, there will be nothing wrong for the patient; and if the fracture is large, it should be bound with a suture, and cure until it heals; and if it is small, do not use much force, as ointments restore it instantly and warmth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the great snow is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn it inward with paper, and there are pinches on the great snow, and bandaging and pressing from one side to another; and if the paper has been removed by incision, that does not cause any harm; and when the great snow is coated, cleanse the skin with boiling salty water, and cure the wound until the patient's limb is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that forms into paper layers above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing much pain to their eyes, and they come home with cataracts at morning, so they cannot look at the sunlight because tears run down their eyes; and for this reason they lie on their backs after midday and sleep under them, covered by moist sheets near their faces, which hide the exinach that appears in their oil. And when you press the affected area with your two hands and feel the extrusion from within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the operation is that the malade places his head in your hand; and then you take a linen cloth, and make a tent-like circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, and put it underneath; and press on both sides until the exinach are assembled within the circle; then you open up some moisture from the sore spot with a sharp incision wide enough so that there is no longer any larger than the wound made by the vein-opening. Make leather in various dislocations, according to the shape of an oily patch.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the drape between your shoulders to the front and behind your hands until they are spread; and make sure you don't press into the crack so that it doesn't wince all the way down to the shoulder joint.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the crack, give it a little push to make it appear; then pull as we have said, and wrap bandages tightly on both sides and put them above the joint, and bind firmly with straps.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such houses that grind arrows and place them to corrupt the moisture which takes time; then treat it as long as it is healthy. And if it reaches the abscess cavity, curing with emplastrons softening until it becomes healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs on paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When on paper hairs are adorned other than their nature, and become hardened, if they harm the hairs, and bring about manners of illnesses as we have mentioned, such as excessive tearing and softening of paper-like materials and albuginosity to the extent that it affects the hairs; then the cure involves three methods: either by fire treatment in combination with caustic medicine according to what appears best, or solely by caustic medicine depending on whether one is a physician or barber skilled in such treatments, and this can be done through incision and suturing or through ligatures, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It must be that you place the head of the malaide (likely referring to an injury or afflicted area) in your healthy state, then turn the paper oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it's good; if not, insert one needle through every .i. millimeter above it; and whether this happens near the margin of the paper where hairs grow from there, or by these hairs growing nearby, and draw a line across all the surface, covering the entire spatumile (a large area), up to the great laumier (likely referring to an imaginary figure on the document) down to the small; then remove one millimeter of thread, place a little tent-like cloth and linen undernee the paper, and draw a figure like a candle holder, as if it were a lamp's wick, and everything must be that the figure is according to the quantity you have elevated above where this document is set.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	i.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a shape as well as the candle flame we have told about, in three instances twisted according to the form which is herein described:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then cover that which lies beneath those small forces exactly as the form described herein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the pliers, and that thing is no different, take an awl or two strands of wire, and embed them in the figure; and put one strand near the large margin, and another strand near the small margin, and join together your threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, as we have told about, and assemble the two lips of the wound by suturing it so that it heals well. And if the abscess comes to your incision, cool it with ointments and warm compresses.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and never happens that the paper's hair becomes converted; it is required that you use what we have said about the incision, but the stitching in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of the stitches is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and work on it according to what I have said, and then make .ij. stitches by art, and .ij. sutures also long as the paper and the wide space around each hole; and cover the .ij. parts with .ij. pieces or holders of which you keep the threads; then join them gently under what lies on top of the paper's oil, and tighten the stitches in each section formed; and leave it so that for many years, the skin that is stretched will harden and shrink, and die by itself, as long as it needs.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, then you must heal it as long as it needs to be healthy; and when the wound has been sutured, and if the paper has been raised, then no longer will there be hair on the thread; and this is the shape of the stitches that you make according to this figure and quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you should use a thin needle and thread silk and fine filament; then assemble the ends and join them finely, and place the threads' length one palm long; then take another fine silk filament roughly, and tie it to the top of the first two threads; put your patient's chief in his natural state so that the operations are declared, for they are delicate and thin operations, then thrust the needle into the root next to the hair cluster, and pierce carefully on the thread haphazardly until you pull it out above the hair naturally; then extract the hair up to the filament, and tie the hair in the filament, whether there is one or two or three or more. Then withdraw your hand so that the hairs of the paper with natural hair sprout again throughout the thread.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	morce desazses. L'estroiz itmesem esplean deffacez tolere: theorez l'eaux enimensurfaire despear. Ebonge anatomiesmelet:a laisse andrombrejacin aiaunle ofsaintic. Orithor. Andalus, iles.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the moisture of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	As this disease is called "aleacrati" or joint moisture brought about by oil, if it has of .ij. manners: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens through a wound healing process, or cutting technique, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of this work is that you fracture the suture, and release its lips, and put linen tentacles in it until it becomes healthy; and there is no need to use things that tighten or restrain during the treatment. For if you do such actions, the illness returns worse than before; but working with softening materials, like fenugreek; and boiling water or heated hempseed meal cooked in lin oil, and ointments of diaconium melted into no other oil, and enveloping it all in a tent, and treating this way.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must guard against it setting in again according to its former shape; and these operations we have mentioned do not return her [the patient] to the form she was before but rather re-shape her, concerning the condition of this illness.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The concept "de la char qui vient en l'oil" (of the oil that comes into play) is an expression referring to substances, potentially oils or other medicinal preparations, which might exacerbate a condition like joint moisture if not used properly. It reflects the medieval understanding of cause and effect in medicine, where external factors such as ingested substances could influence internal health states.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This illness that truly originates from "axacrati," and is natural and accidents arise; the accident comes from injury and fracture and cautery and similar things; and in this work of treating it you must pierce with an awl, then have a double thread, and lay the wire on the left ribbon so much to the right that the threads will stick out in .ij. pairs along the char; then the char is placed above all the needle, and the coat over an ipsilateral spatule large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	: "Lloritre pictures ayeke siensiant theoron. Ita :sainces of theiake la merveint (Old Frenches leuves ciples in ieval century andersecre: itent theifceur. Ifacmeat theof thefej. Ionescavalier leteinca.tract.ajustre. Theesent ajustice,
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it is necessary to make a plain incision above the hairs of the veins; and according to what has been said before; then open between the two threads of a tent, as I have previously mentioned; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it varies greatly in shape, and the masters of all possible measures devised by them may help return the figure to its natural shape; and the malady itself, according to what is required for treatment and various other preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	Injury from paper burning
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering occurs to the hands in such a manner that the paper above it is burned with the white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions; therefore you must cut the point of a razor under the delicate skin surrounding the abscess, and lift it up; and bind as sutures until you achieve the subtle balance whereby the abscess does not worsen the oil nor bleed heavily. This incision should be made lightly so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and afterwards, this assembled area is free of any use with oily water, or softened water, and combed hair; then place linen tape between the paper and the oil, and lay moistened wool on top. After a few days, apply thread and other suturing materials as long as it remains healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the oil's skin
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Seeking that the skin is according to two manners: it is nervous and looks like a hard sore, and another which is not nervous but seems stiff as congealed meat; when touched with iron and held in pinches, it cannot move at all; and both appearances begin towards the great wrinkle, growing slowly until they cover the entire view of oil, light, and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the malady places its head above, then do this to the hairs, and treat the skin folds, and elevate them above; and they are placed underneath. Then take a needle, and put one strand of horsehair, or goat woolen cloth, and draw it out from the abscess in its shape: and anytime the ulcer only alone, and thenes de l’incision, sierein toil leu li chief, siens.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	g’sse (tostes:12e apece au moinsacharme siagele:sanglion,athe.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the point is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nail does not enter, it is often treated this way by medicine; and when I have heard of such a division many times, and if you see it covered, then do as follows with the steel instrument: take the spatula quickly and strike it according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently remove the nail above, and if you see that it does not reduce or press down on the reason afterwards, then drip from your mouth into the oil collar made of litharge and red copper coin and rub oil yesterday; then repeat the other operation according to this method until she is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing contrary in the oil, as if for incision, then first treat the incision until it is sounding, and then repeat the operation as before until it is sounding.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the bandage on the nail causes great harm to the oil, then lift it from the nail and place a part and not all at once without shedding tears; then drip into the red copper coin-shaped oil collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the blood that rises in the eye socket
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some homes have never seen red blood rise in the eye socket, and cover the eyeball with paper and press it down firmly, forming a rose-like shape; and if this treatment sets the patient'ayer up well, then carry out these operations as described above for unhealthy joints, and support them with strength; and take care to remove the first blood, and continue grinding until the final cut, and keep that you make sure not any bleeding occurs during this operation. And it is the spatula used in making small incision of the nail and its little forces as we have described in the incision of the nail's division and their strength; so after this demonstration by this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the blood has been drained out, then apply oil of copper coin or a red copper-coin collar made with medicines corrosive; and put cotton dampened with water on it to secure the joint from any further opening; if he hesitates nothing and nails sprout through your hands, and you doubt whether there will be an incision in the joint again, then let the oil remain and treat that which calms the joint's pain as much as possible; and return to this operation until it is sounding, and then make such charred signs on the oil following this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is required that you treat each oil flake of the natural way; and from accident in iron work; and do not push your hand into any of these operations as long as hearsaws are suffering those members.
des voines des eulz	"Of the veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	There are red veins that are covered over the oil, and they prevent observing their workings and weaken them every day. The matter is now as follows: let the patient do so that these veins be placed firstly where you look at it, then indeed they are, and there is no other disease more dangerous than these red veins; therefore, treat them thusly: command the patient to place their head on your table, then lower those veins throughout the entire body according to his knowledge, and make the innervation very subtle in this manner:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let these veins be divided by degrees in one i.e. their course following this particular formation:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then make these veins subtly powerful, and withdraw the blood hour by hour until you see those dangerous veins being removed from the oil; and be careful not to damage the points of the spatulae, do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your efforts so that only these veins remain; and when you have done this, distill a green and red colored copper oil to dissolve what is remaining from the dislocated joint.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot accomplish everything in that hour, apply a soothing substance to the oil on those aching joints, and leave it for some days until the pain has subsided and is secure from abscess, then resume according to this manner before he becomes healthy; and this is the form of their forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	From the oil's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The greater name for "fistula" is "arissatium": when you cure it with cautery and fiery medicine as I have mentioned before, and it does not heal, then this causes harm to him that breaks open at the abscess, and strip away all moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackening, if she has all the necessary instruments for this work here as I have described; it is called a "rough head," and made of iron in two pieces joined together, and are pointed like a chisel or so in this current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the bone that has become decayed, then turn it between your fingers, and press a little with your hand until you know that this corruption has been resealed; do this once, and afterwards restore its surface with medicinal excising substances.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joints are joined together, and he is numbed, and the knee's growth is joined, and remain in this state for 40 years, and it does not renew itself or become dislocated again, and accidents do not come upon him; if this one. And you will find bone of that second time through oil with iron rod according to this form: and let the joints are sovereigns qu’il est proultre de la vache beaux de ce que il n'est un cuitre demein apeau ceste ellsent.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then he places it next to the bone on one side of the joint, and withdraw your hand from the oil a little bit, then turn it completely around until it pierces through the bone and feels the patient's pain through that position if his hand is held tightly against his neck; and then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh becomes loose and hardens, then this matter goes to the neck. It is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	The outcome of the oil application.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the edges of the wound have opened completely, and it does not disturb or contract in the neck, then you must bandage the patient; then apply warm compresses or hot cloths without injuring him to suck out blood, then bandage with a mixture of aloe vera, incense, and sandalwood, and bind the wound tightly using layers of linen; make sure that each layer is sufficiently thick, and double every three pieces. Then stretch over one fold of cloth firmly made from a thin bandage, and repeat sucking blood without injury; remove the compresses and leave the wound unbandaged for day and night, if you see the edges come together again, it indicates that you must re-bandage it more tightly. Then remove the binding after one or two days of nutrition, and if the swelling has subsided, it is good; otherwise, repeat the bandaging and treatments until the wound heals completely.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Double rupture of a veil.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the veil rupture occurs in the vein or when it happens because of small paper-like particles like grains of resin and is difficult to see; then if you cover the wound, the treatments are such as inserting one needle at the root of that part above the section underneath, and inserting another needle or a double thread in the part beside the bone joint; and pierce it, and bind it tightly according to its position; then apply the double thread around half the vein with damp linen, and stretch it well, then extract the second needle and put on the wound still moistened with blood; let it bleed along with the vein until healed, and treat the wound with comforting substances as long as it is healing. And there may be cases where the wound is limited by a piece of cloth in every part of a circle around half the vein until fully healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the edges have a significant appearance, it may pierce through the subtil spatumile which veils with oil, correcting the amorphous white color and descending the edges, then immediately stretch it until fully healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of the blood from the wound.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	i-le. icals. ceare itsewicle demeans: entaillace. Theese le:esque acaire. It: (and. Ailentre laissie, to the flesh.
des aigues de l’oil	of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the signs of blood in its division, and it is necessary to determine; according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient lie between your crossed hands with fingers pointing towards the sun, so his oil becomes warm and tightly constricted a lot; then take in your right hand, if the points are on the left, or in your left hand, if they are on the right; then take in your right hand where the points are to the minor rim of the crown, placing it next to the edge of the head with a sharp line into the cavity of the oil at that place, and push the instrument called "almagda" carefully, and turn your hand until it pierces deeply into the cavity of the oil, and feel that almagda moves in the void thing; and it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda line be to the end point of the measuring stick; and this is the crown of the oil. If you see the bone on that paper for the brightness of the horned leather, and put the instrument there or where the blood flows, then squeezer another path after it. Now when the blood enters, he sees his patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little rest, and the blood comes up the second path, apply pressure with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, extract quickly almagda by turning your hand slowly; then take out a small piece of silver, pour it into the oil therein, and after that wash the oil thoroughly. Then we place in the oil clean cloth or linen soaked in olive oil and abundant with wool, and tie it with the pure oil. And those who belong to our time, we apply a broach with woollen thread.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, for it has too many parts that are too stiff, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument called "alberit," which looks like this: It consists of two flat-ended metal points connected by a short handle. This design allows the practitioner to apply leverage and force more effectively while performing bloodletting or similar medical procedures with greater precision and control over the depth and location where the almagda (or "alberit") needs to enter, ensuring that it can reach through stiffly adherent tissue.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the sinus obliquely, and do not go too far off point; make it shallowly, then insert almagda, as we have said; and after completing this work in that dark chamber, turn him upside down on his back in a damp place, and bind according to its disposition for the next seven days, so that he does not move his head either way. It is necessary that you should raise it hastily if the blood rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When the incision on the foot comes, you should dislocate the joint before the seventh day, and address its healing; and when it is calm, you can move the joint and place it back on its base, i.e., with an angle of no more than a year to avoid any delay, and then settle in that dark house immediately. And then issues from this house little by little, and turns into its case; and know that none of these people should intervene in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Yerach, who told us that in their peace they made an almadel perforated with water, so the water would succeed them wherever they went, but I have never seen it anywhere in our land nor in ancient books; and perhaps it's a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of an almadel, for those who do not know them see it as such; and they should be properly made.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head be made from this subtlety, and the tail at three angles water.
de la char sor le neis	from the skin over their neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There have never been any mixed-up versions of such characters, so none seem to be scorpions with many legs; and if it has any or it is dressed in fine color, or if the skin is brightly colored, then in those cases where these skins are not stained but pure white, you must place the patient'inaside your hand against the sunlight, open his nostrils, and press down on the edges of those characters; then let it be that you hold under the delicate sharp edge on one side, as long as you know that the skin is entirely unstained.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any remains of it cannot be covered with one or two sharp blows from a dagger lightly applied without causing further delay; and if the incision on the skin is not sown as it should be—if the cut heals well, and there are no foul signs left behind. If however the incisions are malignant, hurry to cauterize them so that they do not remain unsheathed and unossified, but become fully ossified with all the characters; then let a poultice of either oil or vinegar be applied to it.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	seslere. Andrepresse.gavit.c’ilueuant morceau cent iles, sceux.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it may be of silver or gold, like an overturned lamp, as if a cannon, and you lead it also; and when you see, if it makes a closed cannon, and place its striking plates near the head to dislodge the chief; and take one hand at the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the straw on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the chief on the neck is afflicted by a disease called "typhus," and it grows and becomes great, as long as it appears to be seen; therefore, you must first deal with it at the beginning, and the healer is well-prepared, then apply cautery or hot medicine; if left untreated until it is large, take care if it is hard, of foul color, and poor senses: for no one touches him with iron because it is an enchanted puncture, as we have seen on occasion, great harm befalls the patient; and when a puncture is from a severe touch, not merely of foul color, then you can treat the patient and relieve their neck pain and fears, and cure the area with restrictive measures.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is touched and twisted
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Saws that when a solution for continuation comes into one of these operative openings, it is beneficial little because in some homes; therefore, you must see if the wound on their whole body is fresh; and accordingly dress their two lips with a stitch, then cure them until they are healthy. If their lips are sore on either side, you must scour all those parts as long as they heal, then join the two lips to a stitch, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle dragon's blood and incense upon it; and place over that powder some strong or other adhesive material, and let it seep through their wound until it heals, and then treat them with ointment as long as they are healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitch is that you assemble the solution either by needle, as we have said in the abdominal stitch; or by thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	L'enchanteur du point de la bouche, which in English translates to "the enchanting spot of the lips." This phrase would likely relate to a medieval concept of magical or superstitious beliefs tied to specific body points believed to have special powers. However, this is not directly from an Old French medical text but rather a general idea that might be found in such texts discussing health and disease.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In homes afflicted in the apostemes on the lips, and it is often painful to turn them apart of each part, and cope les levres, soif est bien: dese parler de ce que la coustume de lou cestaintres leu.comence avantage ainscrivent:escription desin in theorce aire coment.
de la char des gencives	: 12000000000:ing, "The originales of theore French :n'tens the same Thees:0000aulphires0, theorelelore asume0s.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	gach soffre oulcelle andentiftel avanturexement thatnse temelascecure,stefscave.urange.
des sordens	of disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Occasionally there are stones in the chief of the gums, located between teeth and gum tissue, which are ugly and hard; and there are no black or yellow and pointed teeth until corruption reaches the gum, making the teeth smell bad. It must be done to have this patient sit on your knees, and their teeth should be in good shape, while removing these stones or tartar as long as they remain visible; and thus perform cleaning both white and greenish tones, and yellowish discoloration, and other stains until they are gone. If it is determined that this issue first concerns the tooth's core, then it is beneficial; if not, start again on the second day and third stage as long as you have addressed everything. Be aware that teeth require various types of cleaning methods for removal, according to what their work shows, because dentists who remove stones from between teeth use other forms than those used by dentists who work within the gums; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is required that when you treat the tooth's pain so much as you can, because it should not take too long; because this substance is very high in such a way that there is no excuse for hurrying during removal.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the maladies of the tooth are constrained in treatment, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth being healthy; many times this pain was felt by the sick tooth, and take care that it remains a holy tooth; and do treat the good tooth well; otherwise, there will not part with such pain due to these saints as we have always wanted to make them; when you are sure of the infected tooth, you must scrape the inside of the tooth thoroughly in order to protect the gum from all parts; then remove it slightly at first and again until it is well scraped, and firmly fix the teeth of the sick patient between your hands, so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After scraping the tooth straightly and if it does not break, do not use any of these instruments and place damp cloths on each side gently, as you have done first; when the stone is perceived and melted, it must be filled with wax or putty in which cavities are found; and if pushed subtly by tweezers, it should not break upon pressing; it also requires much effort around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	level. Alluce, the commentaire:lestarre. Commentsure. Comment:ecesse laissu theorice. lesin.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	n avantièges.secure:s laisse enceurieu (louste confeursece anixe apeutié que clessex,fatere.rete. Allongage
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members that do not bend easily while being pulled, and they should be made of iron well-forged, and teeth strong enough to hold.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the dent. (Note: The original text appears to cut off abruptly; "de la racine des dens" could refer to a topic related to dental anatomy or treatment.)
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	If the root is pulled from the tooth, it indicates that you must place cotton wool dipped in beeswax on it for a day or two, as long as the tooth remains soft, then insert the pliers called "algefri," which make the patient appear cautious; and they should also be made like a rasp and have this shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out with all these pliers, it indicates that you must discover the entire root within the root itself, and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as an awl, so that it appears in this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if they are large enough so that they do not break, and the root springs from there, it is good; but if not, then you must use all instruments (tools), so that these forms come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument that has two teeth, so it appears in this form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front of teeth for the reason of the dental issues, and of this instrument which appears to be large pliers, so it looks like this form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these instruments must not break them apart, and they know that many tools for teeth issues exist; and there are also other instruments which are not counted; and the masters subtly apply their own instrument to themselves by means of self-examination according to what its indications and diseases show it, because it has some specific illnesses or the old ones did not teach any instrument for diversity in bones, if it breaks a fragment or other parts, then he seeks among these instruments that I have mentioned to you and helps with movements, so it appears like this form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-forged to hold the bone, but not prevent it from holding; then restore the medicine's place on such an injury, and if there is granulation in the bone that is small, he uses all this instrument for it:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if the tooth appears not in accordance with its natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially for women's teeth; it indicates that you must know whether the root comes after the tooth or not, and is not in a position to cut (for this reason); therefore, we call it a tool: and if there are small beaks on both sides of the tooth, and made of iron well-forged.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	.i. Leu apremerres dux deffacre a la coi ceu douleus d’estcomme lesure.i thexere leslal 13res :i leu :cautre of itesuperv20 :coldumeintres duke alise descreature,sureslaur:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the knife used to remove a tumor; and in cutting into it, they do little and lightly each day, so that it does not move while growing; then at the end of growth there is no sharpness left, and if it is too deep-rooted and bleeds the tongue, then it must be sharpened until it becomes even, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	The teeth are loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth in front are loose, whether by percussion or fracture, and they cannot be pressed against their position so that they do not move and cause pain, then they must be treated with restricted medicines; but using a silver wire is not suitable because it becomes green and rusty over time, whereas gold does not change. The thickness of the wire should be adjusted according to the space between the teeth; if you want to tighten the teeth, first take the thread and double-ended needle, then place the loose teeth between the healthy ones, whether there are one or more, so that it is aligned with the healthy tooth on the other side until it does not move at all. Then resume treatment of the area where you started, and gently twist your hands and tighten it as long as it does not move; if the ligature around the root of a tooth prevents it from being untied, then tie the loose teeth with fine wire pliers, assemble them between the healthy tooth, so that they do not cause tongue injury; let it stay this narrow until it can remain in place without moving or loosening. This is the form and figure of treatment for both the healthy and loose teeth as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is tightened back into its position, if it returns again and again as we have said; and never interferes with something that seems natural and painful, and no time has been made of a form resembling an ossified toothbone, and then the restraint is placed at the spot where there is a deficiency, and the pressure applied in this manner, as we have said, and it remains effective for a long duration.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the line of the tongue. This instruction could relate to a dental procedure or orthodontic treatment that involves protecting or supporting the tongue's position during correction or realignment processes. It might involve specialized appliances, such as lingual braces, which are bonded directly onto the backside of the teeth for aesthetic reasons and discreet orthodontic treatment while ensuring patient comfort and maintaining normal oral functions.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	: "d'leu. Ifre:age, andace de la terre. alice,lateralexile, theoric, thenace. Itire. Ait age, fromeran.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see his flesh colored red or black or hardened, so that the bad odors do not reach him, do not touch it, for it is a carbuncle; and if he is declining towards blistering, and there is moisture in it, then the sore will drip from beneath its surface, and the removal of one part and another; and when it does not improve with your work, put salt over it until it becomes stone-hard, then raise his limb again so that you treat everything thoroughly; then lift up his foot from side to side and cure him with other cures until he is sound.
des apostemes de la gorge	Throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Never in the throat comes bile called "godath," and they specifically target the .ij. almonds, and when you cure them, as we have described in the division, if they are not healed, be careful: do not touch small abscesses colored red or with a hard consistency, also not with iron; and if they are red and their roots are large, also not with iron, but let it lie so long until it dies out, and then you will see that it would break on its own; and if they are of white blisters, and the roots are delicate, provide an appropriate instrument to cover them, but first observe whether the abscesses settle down and become calm. Then have the patient sit in the sun, keep his body healthy, work with your hand holding the syringe between his hands, press the tongue against all the instrument, which is where form comes from; and make it of silver or fine gold as if using surgical knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and see the abscess, if you take the sore and prick it with a thorn in an almond, and draw blood more than usual; do not touch any part of the fabric with it, then shape the tool on the instrument, which is where form comes from (probably referring to shaping or forming a medical implement); all parts are curved like claws, and one side is opposite another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or thin steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	nsece laithelexse thegree decompose;droitilgessexe aungreuxesseuranture lameblettezignecteckles.faire outise iageu0suferssecelle:naginea,udexinning,atirevague reference, faudexampermecongronse develdetransqueurrevience
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be divided into one part and another name; and when you have extracted one almond, do the same with the other according to this manner, and after making an incision treat the patient's severe fever hot and warm, and moist, so that they remove blood clots if there are any, or cooked quince stones, or fir cones, and such things, until the sores are healed; then cure him until he is well; and never do other extractions in the throat than these two almonds, which you handle as you did with them.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I treated a woman with an abscess located in her throat, namely one that was small enough to fit through the two openings (grooves) of the esophagus; she had the entire throat tightly closed, so much so that she could not breathe or eat or drink, and ultimately died if she remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was large enough to have formed through one of these grooves. I treated her first by making an incision in one place; then I opened the wounds with a great portion; after that, I put on gauze in both openings and pressed the tongue; afterwards, I inserted the incision into the abscesses, and took out part of it, only obtaining a small piece of spleen; thus her throat opening was cleared from the abscess, and she began to drink water and then wine again without ceasing to cauterize that area for over a month. Nevertheless, as soon as I re-cauterized in her throat: therefore there was no further increase in size; and I left those areas, and God only knows what happened after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the bleeding from the brain occurs, and it is drained but cannot stay in place, repeatedly displacing with slight movement as we have described in dislocation treatment, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Give a hair or chief some medication as if from the scooping of a ladle, and place the instrument with medication on her brain; and let the patient be lying down against his side so that saliva and muscles come out of the mouth in contact with the medicine inside, preventing it from going into the throat and bleeding; then hold your hand tightly over all the medicine and press it onto the brain for an hour until you see the medication nearsighted and the inflammations caused by the medication are soothed; if you find blood, wrap some cotton in any instrument and moisten the cotton with saliva under the skull's skin, then place that wrapped cotton on the brain using a cloth inside, until it dries. Do this often as long as the cautery of the medication is perfected, then let her dry for 2 to 5 years; and if you need to reapply the medication cautery, renew it over the blood in the skull with cotton wrapped in cloth, and treat with cold water rinses until she's well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more about the incision than cauterization; if it's done by steam bath and soapwort androminthe thyrstones. Androgore collect all or any of these herbs, and heated pot in this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	nare:
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times the airway or spine of a fish, or nothing at all; therefore you must see what you can observe, and press the tongue to the sun in all the instrument so that you can feel movement; and if it does not open up in the throat and is put back into the throat, then you must make him vomit the patient so that his flesh be cooked in the stomach; perhaps by this way the harmful thing will come out through vomiting; or the malady swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a leaf of lettuce, or .i. crust of dry bread; and to the sponge you add thread, and then rehydrate it; and when it comes to the surface, it opens up again, and then you will make vomit; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take a tool with this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And if the instruments are placed on top of its head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and make sure you do not touch the epiglottis, which does not move, nor push any bone inside; and let the patient push the instrument so that the malady pushes the instrument too, because if it is pushed out or comes out by force, then you must vomit it throughout the entire instrument until it is expelled.
de la sansue de la gorge	If there is inflammation of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is the throat medicine used if as I have mentioned in the division of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the malady's throat under the sun with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see phlegm, treat it by a little pinch or use delicate tweezers that are worth it for such a matter. And if it doesn't work, take an iron chestnut and thrust it into the malady's throat; then throw out of the chestnut a hot piece of iron, and do this often. And when the malady turns blue all day long, take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and let the tongue feel it engulfed in the saliva, and move the phlegm to its hand often; and if at once you see that the phlegm feels the cold water, then it will expel.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	lege (13sbloque viences leu deus. Theves feinanction duel. Itresen lautre andernereis lector: "Ir French, thele peice of ferme, anatomyte l'avec verses laide; ence :er leucreature, 12.autei:nule. I. iaurinage,seille.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument for cutting is smooth, when you can see it, looks like bent tongs to enter the throat; and resembles a beak in care, and has roughness as an angle grinder, so that whatever it takes, it cannot loosen. And from here:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter of excisiones (excisions)
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many types of excisiones mentioned in this book, according to what comes after it for both one and the other; they differ in perforation and size; and these two methods differ, wherein the first method is similar to my own, because it holds moisture. And the second method is when they are inside the heart, as its chief is different from those of which it is based, and the excisiones' entrance into the bone differs from those that come at joints, and each one has their judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And when an excision does not need to pierce, as long as its completion is sufficient for it; and if there are such that do require piercing as they come about, and they do not die according to their completion, as happens with those that come near joints, because the tendon and nerve of the joint become corrupted by this contraction in that limb. Or the excision is located near the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes weakened, it will harm the main member; or it comes from the foundation, so when piercing, it becomes dead; and there is no need to pierce a crushed sense-related excision that is next to the foundation, because it would form an opening in between them, and they grow fistulas; and it cannot be healed properly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the degree of perforation for the excision that becomes dead according to completion, and this corresponds when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and diminution in both pain and swelling; and it is necessary that you position the perforation based on the excision, and where the opening has occurred; and make sure the perforation's length is long enough for the main part of the excision, whether it occurs in hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, and all limbs alike. And if there is no flexion in those places, then you do not need to consider a perforation there either.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And in these cases, according to that member. And if the excision is perforated as much as it can be digested completely, as we have said. For when you pierce an excision of a large size; and many holes, according to the thickness of the bone marrow. And if for one orde apostemes are perforation. It is required that thou ploie d’apres laisses:semblance demeinz en l'est leu cestandre apostemes aoutemence des, et il estan .iij.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	cions.astres cra chevelves. a n ita ̃s : the
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blood flows from the work, then treat it with cold and moisture, and wrap a cloth around it, and apply pressure on the bleeding spot repeatedly.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is essential that this be known universally in the treatment of ingrown nails: as I have said about how to proceed before treating the ingrown nail and hereby follows.
des soros	of soaks
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	When dealing with small ingrown nails, the methods are known to us; they resemble those used by a farrier on horses and have similarities; some contain moisture, making them soften easily; when emptied of moisture, leave nothing behind in the barrel that contains it, as it returns immediately. If present now, apply Egyptian ointment first, but if not, use water, linen, and wrap the wound, leaving it for another day; then repeat applying cotton soaked with ointment on the third day, until you know it's no longer bleeding; treat the wound as appropriate, as long as it remains healed. If the ingrown nail has a thick layer, pull it out along its length; and remove all threads from inside, then apply all the necessary treatment to the sock or stocking where it is located; if the toe continues to bleed, do what I told you afterward. Also treat an ingrown nail that's sharp, and in the groove and pit with care as I have previously instructed.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	fromer ape:escalleurs leauge theorceur lore a. Judexent before.comme sce de:caracter.
des scrophules	of bole, and to let them grow long and smooth; and s’il poingnent a leur fisture, les estraint de le fuir tant qu'ils naissent.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times this incision is made on the neck, and over the scars, and in the wounds, and it never goes to another place or spot, but it remains close together. Each scrofula has its own area where moisture accumulates, and there are also malignant ones that do not respond well to health; when you see a good alignment on the neck, similar in color to red hair, and silent from one part and is not arising anywhere else near the carotid artery or conduit, and it's not perforated at all; it must be extracted thoroughly above each part, where there are two kidney-shaped lobes as in chief incision; they grow slowly and little by little, and you should be cautious that you do not crush the nerve or vein, so that the hand does not paralyze, nor overreach, so it doesn't hurt too much beforehand, and don't extract what you shouldn't.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you extract the vein or artery and it doesn't allow to overcome, then apply vitriolic slime or any other powder that tightens blood clots, and restrain the wound; and let it remain until the incision is relaxed and softened, and begin to allow for healing. And when the sinus has been eliminated, return to your task as long as you complete it; then be attentive to any small scrofulas that may linger, and if they are there cope with them and remove their pustules. And if in the root of the scrofula vein a large swelling is found, it does not require that you extract that scrofula at its root, but instead let down the thread double thick, and let it fall by its nerve; then apply wet cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the scrophula completely, it is required that you join together its two lips of the wound and bind them now; for there was no delay in excess for the greatness of the scrophula. It is required that you understand to cover the root of it, and draw water from it, and bind it as we have said. Those scrophulas which contain superfluity, pierce open they die; and pierce thus as the one before mentioned, depending thereafter, then treat them with ointment and similar things, so that what is delayed in corruption does not worsen; and when the wound has been well cleansed, heal it by applying warm oil until it becomes sound.
de squinance	From the Latin term "squina," meaning a hole or opening in the skin: Squinting can refer to having difficulty seeing clearly because of an imperfect alignment of the eyes, commonly known as astigmatism. However, without additional context from Old French, this translation is speculative. The original text may have pertained to treatments related to wounds (as "squinance" could be a misspelling or variation) rather than visual impairment.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and wrote about cutting the throat; but I have never seen such an act in our land, and it is their written word that describes their language. This sentence could relate to historical practices of self-inflicted harm or punishment described metapromptically within a medical context.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have squinting (or astigmatism), it is required that the epiglottis flap in the throat be removed; and no aid can be given for this reason because all the veins and blood vessels of the malade are found in those with abscesses in the mouth, or throat, or .ij. tonsils (assuming "ij." is a typographical error). This sentence suggests an incorrect connection between astigmatism and physical disfigurement as no medical evidence supports such linkage; however, if we consider it metaphorically within its historical context, the statement could be addressing treatments for conditions involving the throat or tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the vein (assuming "chenal" refers to a channel or pathway), it is required to remove the epiglottis to avoid death resulting from strangulation. This sentence metaphorically alludes to conditions that cause swelling and blockage, which could be related to severe throat infections rather than astigmatism. The removal of the epiglottis would not be a standard treatment but could imply relieving pressure or addressing an obstruction in this historical context.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is required then, as we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we make incisions of .iij. or .iiij. circles or an .iiij. small incision through which it passes, not leaving any scars on the skin; this sentence again metaphorically refers to a procedure involving the removal or cutting into tissue near the throat area and is meant to emphasize precise technique over harmful practice within its historical medical context.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those who have such sections in the epiglottis do not possess any blood flow therein, and their veins are long of supply; this sentence suggests that when parts of the epiglottis are removed or affected without proper vascular supply, it could lead to complications. However, as astigmatism does not involve such physical structures, interpreting this within a metaphorical framework related to throat conditions might be more fitting for an Old French medical text discussing surgical interventions and their consequences on physiology.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the skin of the throat to the entire circumference, and then cut through the skin there until it becomes thin at the neck; remove the veins in the flesh, if you do not see any sign, and then make the incision as we have said. This sentence suggests a surgical procedure involving cutting into the skin around the throat area (likely intended to address an abscess or other condition causing fear and discomfort. It doesn't relate directly to astigmatism but seems more aptly suited for medical instructions dealing with localized infections or conditions necessitating incision, drawing a connection between this practice and squinting/astigmatism.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	nce parler tote ou il neuf parler aoutre, siu voies ignealan. Il n'tracte french translating outparle. theoritles sansil Frenches.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	n: "saint. Ilfaiture deülaire, ilte ici tiare lapeintre. Fromage asteri'laterry. Androma ferre (12ferre incomme. It:
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	sesage,sea from,cumf3rd:nacre:esque: itype:104me:screatime decade:susive.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	When Albuscus says that one cannot do this so long as the throat is all burned out, and the evil-minded are judged to death, and their face is damaged.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	When the epiglottis is used because those who are evil-minded cannot breathe, and so they must die this way.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this they command to leave the wound uncovered until the evil of the disease has passed, and it may last for three years or more.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And they command to sew up the wound and heal it until it is fully healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I have seen a maiden take an axe and strike her throat, and cut the veins in two places on her neck.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I called upon him (or her) as healer, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and it was clear that she did not suffer any injury but only a throat issue, which appeared to be caused by this wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried up to tend to the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And there was nothing wrong with the maiden except that she had gone red in the face, and returned to her usual state afterwards.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this I say there is no fear in the shaping of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	from a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These images are called "hernias of the throat," and they are large in size with a golden-brown hue, and they occur mostly in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And it is according to two manners of nature; and the patient's death en .iij. ains or sevrer la boneves leu, et li maundes: "
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the injury occurs according to two ways: one resembles fat people, and the other is similar to those abscesses we have seen coming from arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And it is fearful for him, and he does not need to perform bloodletting on all wounds except those that are small; he tries and searches in every part of the internal apparatus.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	So you treat it as if it were like fat people, and do not bind it to any vein, but rather break it open, just as we have done with our own cases, and heal all its parts.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search thoroughly, and heal it as it must be done, until it is perfectly sound.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways in which we have observed include:
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And he wishes me to tell all the differences which exist between us and the outcomes.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the fever and heat persist until it is not subsiding, and then completes the discharge; however, once the fever and heat are relieved, they do so too.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With no fever or heat or pain in them, and contains one of its own sack, which is the same color as a cow's cor, and begins also like a cyst, and becomes large too.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are in several ways similar, either fat, or damp, and many of their colors are as I have described in the previous section on divisions.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	He wishes that when you come to the treatment of such cases, you search and examine first in all the instruments called "internal apparatus," according to what form it comes or from which physician who follows after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inspecting abscesses in our cases is to probe or press more moistly on the abscess than you would in examining it, and turn your fingers gently here and there, until you know that the pus has been felt, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the internal apparatus, and be careful that it is not torn.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture comes out of it and its color is so, as I have said in regards to other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the internal apparatus comes out of it, and take you pulling paints, and heal so colure deffense.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	:nce oun. Comme tu :commencing a itgust. :sans ce. In theorma it's: coment :maint. Ishanatomy. Ander.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	If it remains still for nothing, it returns to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it lingers for a little while without complaint, and the wound is treated with some corrosive vapors or powders, and closes the wound, and places soothing remedies above it, and heals other treatments until it is well.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it causes us great concern, it takes two-thirds of the lips of the wound and treats him who aggravates it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is against or different from what we have done, and hastens to use a copper vitriol poultice on its site, leaving it for one or two years until the wound heals completely, and rests the exudate of blood; then return to cover that which has remained.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	And here the forms of inflammatits that have been misconstrued, and are of three types: large and broad, and small; and there are about three called "albares," and one is called "breb," and there are also three types: great, wide, and small, which we use to search for fistulae in the aposteme.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also similar to the needles which we use to find witches' marks, and made of copper, iron, or silver, and move as those that are yellowish in color, and more suited for searching out the boils filled with pus.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they are of three types: large, wide, and small, according to the extent of the opening's size.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the tumors are many like this, if you see what I mean: large, wide, and small; and there are also those that have two or three openings of different sizes.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if tumors have three or more openings, and are also of that type; and if tumors have only one opening, and they are of the same kind, but all these require attention in their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	sanglages:l'avoielles.alles whenisier  :usseurre parolletheccrangermeoute to causeuse
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these interposing instruments are the German shepherds refrained in hands, so that the patient does not perceive them at the entrance of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they have three types: great, small, and moderate, just as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And they are not used except for incising flesh like legs, and arms, and breasts, and groins, and similar things.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And there has never been another small instrument resembling the scrapers of abscesses, according to this form, in which blood is drawn.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it has never been placed upon the healthy part of veins, and the arteries, and nothing according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Ne the breasts of any man have swollen when those begin to become corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and which they want to cure them, so he must follow this great form of the line B until line g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and apply medication to the wound by pouring it in layers, and then join together the two corners of the wound with stitches, and heal it so that it is sound.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the patient's male breast grows downward because of its size like women do, he does it in two ribs above by means of two similar openings.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is held by the other at the end of both and where the larger line contains the smaller according to this great form from line B up to line G.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin that lies between the two breasts and remove the fat, and prepare as we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the healing so that it be sound.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not sound or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for discharge of blood, so it must be filled with wet wool in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it remain so that he massages the remaining tissue and fat, then heals it until it is sound.
des apostemes des asselles	'sans
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	There are stitches that come from under the stones which are made like hard scrophula or have spots, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line B down to line .G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole bowl in the incision is emptied, if you apply bleed treatment to the wound with plenty of cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and take care that until heals completely.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the incisions are like those of scrophulae, then they make such cuts as we have said for scrofula fissures, and when the wound has a bowl-shaped appearance, apply cautery in the same manner as previously described.
de la routure de l’artere	from the treatment of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is blocked and its covering has been sutured above it, many incisions occur both to the vessel and vein as well.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if there is one of them when it is for the artery, then the incision goes into its lungs.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it necessary, if it is extraction; and when it is for the vein, then it becomes redistributed again.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is foolish to perform this incision there in the stones and among the bones and where it hurts a lot; and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore they must avoid the iron treatment, and he who is at the head must also avoid it, and in those who have an inflamed artery, suture for a long time.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work on the joints and regularly remove the clot from the artery until it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle there and pierce it on the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread in those two places, according to what I have indicated for the removal of these two arteries that are in the temple.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then the vein that lies between these two needle holes until it fills in, and either they form an incision there.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that it is.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then care for this discharge arising from it, until it is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the incision is on the vein's size, it must be that you tie your hand so as to pull out the incision from all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then throw the arrow from the place where you hold your hand, and cut it, and have two threads, so that you can pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the incision, as I have told you, or join one part of it with two threads, corresponding to each half-part of the wound's edges.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is strong enough, then reposition another arrow at every point along one thread across the entire incision of the first arrow, and bind the threads in four loops around it.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then close the incision until there are no longer any leftover parts protruding outward (superfluez), and handle only what has been sutured and leave untouched that which is already stitched.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cover the wound with a cloth soaked in wine and oil, and provide treatments of bandages and dressings until it is healthy again.
des apostemes des ners	incidents of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As incidents occur in the artery and vein, they also affect the nerves when they are damaged or by excessive labor, and such things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with auxiliaries and devices that are inserted and used in all these ways, and it is such injuries, and its pain seems to be the color of a bruise on the heart, and they have many discomforts.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	but when it is stretched to the point where there is pain, and it's not in the heart anymore, but somewhere along the course.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and let it be covered up well as long as the body part of .iiij. deesme parle pars sancenin ceu leu queulx parla.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	:fyallxent lespremerre thewoman, ilk aoutrelevelon: londayence elic:esle'soule parle. It'sre thecauses. Thechiefel. Iijacare tolce dele:12:iX. Thisxent.caracter.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the incision is small, if you have some pincers, and grasp it at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, if you suspend at the incision, and scrape, then he removes the bone and stitch up the wound until it is healthy again.
des grosses boces pendans	of large bones hanging downwards
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never occurs in the abdomen and not elsewhere on the body, and it is a disease that is called "funge" by its appearance of abscesses, and has both subtle and large roots, and great small and great sizes.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw .i. house wherein there were .ij. abdomens that looked more like funges than anything else, and had no difference in appearance, and were white, and had fine roots, and they cracked, and soon after became moisture-laden.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I extracted them and found in one .xviij. instances weighty, and in another .vj., and the operations on the incision show that if you look at their painful nature, the skin color is pale and damp, and has a subtle root structure.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the case requires a large spatule, and let there be in my presence the caustic fire. Because at the table many times too large discharges of blood arise, and if they do not stop without me hurrying then quickly to the cauterist.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient shaking with fear and anxiety of the iron fire, take a thin strip well-made, and tie it to the abdomen as we have said before, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then restraint, and do not cease to press the thin strip of cloth tightly as long as it covers the abdomen, and work by it; and if the roots are large, you have no fear of coating with me in the belly, but rather cover most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that he does not semblant agains apelee. Then cauterize it is as anneau of lice, siens and desorman: le ches evesaidreis du iave d’aultures devisaide.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	13rdre:00000's 2st.
quant li boude ist fuer	how much the sweat is for him
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the sweat appears due to a wound or an opening in the tissue, and it is on the abdomen and also some of the body parts, as we experience in other procedures, or when blood cuts from veins or arteries according to what comes before, or when there is windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the discharge from a fistula and by the opening of the blow, then the color of the incision seems similar to the color of corns, and it is light but still causes pain, and there are various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressure is applied to its sides, it recoils, and perhaps becomes red, and it greatly enlarges the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	: "Aintresent : the masture :mes amore uni. If it's entaute mesures ofsacre. Andrelien dele, aster (13rdise. Cajourne aspertaining anderresmeasures in theiser :lesque ceter to:
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, then the patient feels pain in the shoulder, and the procedures are such that you should observe whether the appearance is related to artery blood, vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is essential that you allow the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in my treatise on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is related to the intestines or bladder, it is essential that you instruct the patient to urinate on his right side, and then have him lie down in a position where he can empty everything from inside.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then commands the patient to sit leaning against your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	and goes around the area that you have marked all over the body.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then most of the abscess is above the great joint below.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	and ties him with a strong thread or tightly knotted silk cord firmly, and let it hold his leg.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then works on the most of the abscess extended under the cord, and you give your indication, and ask for the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you pull on the cord, it moves, and pushes the intestines back into the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you inflate the bladder, it takes oncinin, and relieves excess fluid.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein is contrary to what you have done, then it moves beautifully thereafter and returns to your work and takes two needles, and fastens them firmly with a thread, and pushes the needles into that area which you think you pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then stretch the abscess over the three needles placed on them, and if you see that they have penetrated, pull out the needles, and let the wound heal itself without intervention.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you must cover it when it is subtle and prone to worsening, then perform the treatment that it requires, and heal the abscess as we have described.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract blood that you pull it out, then heal the wound of which it will be prolonged.
dou chancre	Of fire cautery commands the Malade let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they come forth.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said about the characteristics of scars, and how one should treat them with medicine, and how to approach fire cautery treatment; let us speak of infection penetrating deep into the marrow, and great caution is required in the curative process, they say that when a scar is on the skin or can be removed if it's like scars on breasts or cheeks, etc., and at its beginning one must treat it thoroughly; and for large and old ones, there is no need to approach them, as I have never seen anyone recover from them.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And regarding the practices when it is on the skin or can be removed, as we have said before, you should never purge a black mass with colostrum; then make him well again if he shows swelling, cleanse the black mass by applying oil to facilitate the process; cut away your nodes and all scars, and remove every hair from the head and limbs, leaving nothing for the bone doctor or anyone else to touch; let the wound dry completely in your hand or with anything, and if during its healing you cauterize so much that the artery or vein is damaged, then continue treating it until they are no longer affected.
de ydropisie	Of discharge
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said about the signs of edema and how it is formed from aqueous mixtures, and the signs of each type, and the medical treatment for it, and that which is treated with fire; if only appears solely; and one should not touch iron in these two types of edema: namely tympanites and hydrothorax, because it is deadly; therefore when treating this form of edema known as "eclises" or swelling from medicines, and the treatment does not benefit if the patient's maladies are weak, or if he has another disease besides edema, just like solutions for stomach ailments and other things; and one should not touch iron, because there is doubt; but if you see the patient with great vitality and he only suffers from edema alone, and he is neither too lame nor overly fat, then you must do so:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Behold the patient with right hands and feet, pour les maladies as en laissei. Ce que il yssue especiales: ce qu'il est presse deffortre d’inchiere ons. Vosage ainsuree siens an treffice de louge theu a laxque, tollar :esme duixarre leccle ofichre fitte coupe. Tithaidiction,
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then observe if the dropping is towards the intestines: it indicates that you should cut into her abdomen by two fingers below the point of impact; and if the dropping is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the belly by two fingers. And if it's for gallstones, make the incision on the right side, and there should not be any concern that the patient's heavy weight rests upon the incision;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the skin with your instrument, and you must also lift your hand throughout the entire subcutaneous layer between the skin and fascia as if in scraping by the amount of a finger's width; then pierce the fascia until the space feels soft to the touch at eight milliminas, which is the edge of water, then insert it thereafter with this instrument that has such a shape: And it resembles an extremely fine silver needle or lead-based archer's arrow, and in its part .i. small hole; and on one side .ij. holes, and .ij. on the other side, and .i. another; and you must cut these grooves as if they were feathers, which is the shape of the incision described by writers for quills:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top of this area is the abdomen, if when it swells with blood, it rises immediately on the instrument; you should empty then about two-thirds or three-fourths of that space because if you remove more than necessary in one hour, perhaps the patient dies from resolving her spirit through the sword's blade, or she clutches at her palms, or comes close to death:
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But by the amount of her vigor and according to what the conditions of this debilitated woman's vitality mean, and her parts; then treat with your instrument and retain the blood, as it is held now in order to prevent the opening that lies above the fascia, which I have described previously, so you pierce according to this manner: Then resume the instrument another day if you see the debilitated woman suffering such a condition, and withdraw some small amount of blood;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	l the followinggues; lesmeans before ices vouldes agoires. Commentare ileslactic:n’avec en le'sage-lescrire lescaimainic. Theise (10ire. Thepice,cameatimeanle: a.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the dislocation of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never have children born without an opening in the vein, or if there is one, it is small and not properly located. If it must be decided at once whether to make a very subtle incision on this form: then place a fine thread underneath, and tie and keep it for about three or four years, and when they start urinating, if the opening closes up, break it open and let them urinate, and then put it back; and sometimes there is no need to do so, because the urine that comes out does not leave a closed opening.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	The small opening in the vein is treated by inserting a fine thread of medicine, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their opening properly located are bleeding, because no one has an opening at the top of the vein; therefore they cannot urinate before binding their vein upwards, and they cannot empty the substance into the marrow, which is a very harmful disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of the work involves placing a very heavy pressure on the patient's back, with the opening at the top of the vein and also as small as the tip of a penny, so that if the opening is in the middle of movement, it must be done; and avoid letting the blood flow many times, and when it does occur, disinfect the wound and treat the injury until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules on the vein
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times alate in the vein occur, and it appears to be a grotesque sign; both malignant and benign forms exist. It must be treated with a very small incision of about one centimeter, then bound and massaged thoroughly afterward. Place moistened Egyptian cotton on the wound and treat the inflammation until it heals completely.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the alate is malignant with black discharge and bleeding, it must be treated with caustic therapy. Once you have bound it, if there are parts inside the vein and outside the skin, you must remove the alate that is inside first; and when it has been sutured, then treat the wound carefully. This is because once it is healed together, there is no guarantee that the lump in the vein will not be discharged or become blackened and corrupted. It must have everything that is dark and corrupt removed, then apply a dressing of honey and flour made from grated pomegranate bark and mulberry tree leaves; treat it with other treatments until healed completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	If blood from the wound incisio: secrete, sanc ecrier, siens: leu :n:
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	:ing,5en (ceutude, andredextent:secreitheidges:gift, theceptible:nature:20screwagelevexes:rue : <it:fier : itax agernex demore:cetre.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not painful like other wounds; in any case, all that we do from our will concerning this work, and particularly for children, it is the best deed we can perform, and the easiest to achieve salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children in their laws because they do not practice it according to their laws, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I wanted the greatest part of masters and saints who practiced circumcision in various ways: by scraping away some skin with a blade, applying force, using a needle or tiny lancet; if it was pierced so that there were two holes, then they believed they could heal and let the wound close on its own.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it heals the circumcision and there is double pain, and in the renewal of that part where two points are made, this method does not securely unite the limb; and with the renewal of the finger by chance, iron will enter its workings, and they will bleed again, and many times are born like this without the need for renewal.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the renewal done by force throughout the entire length of the thread, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as cutting too high or low does not matter much in this practice.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand and cut evenly in a straight line of one hundred and ten units; but that the child's skin is well-treated around his body; and if done so, it makes people think about the first operation as though you are only tying the thread around the vein, not just the limb, and then you may provoke him in all possible ways.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you have it in your hands straightly, and draw the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see them, nor any other animal; then put your hand on the vein and blow air, and make it rise as high as the head of the penis is erect. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, tie a double thread knot on the slit, and tie around that slit another one of about two or three threads; and you have twenty-seven links by the second twine, then bind to the pouch and the indice, and leave between these two ties, then let the blood come out quickly above and cut the head of the vein.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood bleed little and little, for it is dangerous; and place powder on top of and above the powder. Therein a cloth made from one day's work of white ox hide, roasted without water, mixed with good oil and rose honey, and he lets it stay on the other day, and treats him again and again until he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The formation of strength for the shoulders if they are held and stretched, and are as strong as the muscles of the neck similarly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the molding if it is found in the cuts between them; therefore it requires that you stretch your neck so that it performs the movement appropriately, and holds evenly, and if you do not hold it straight, then take a pair of tongs, and squeeze accordingly.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass .iij. years (indicating a time frame), and the part that is underneath the branch is swollen, let it remain until the muscles are soothed in their position, and lightly scrape away; as you hold it similarly to how one would move, and keep it from the part of the branch, for this will not harm nor hinder.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the wound with things that are well-known and which we have mentioned regarding powders (presumably referring to traditional or historical medicinal practices), if it is done excessively, and it goes above (implying careful monitoring of any intervention), for it will not harm; treat him so as we have said, until he is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine may be from the operation of a hole, or of frozen blood, or arrows, or miscellaneous things, that we have said in the section on operations;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not expelled (discharged), and you see that retention is because of the hole which is in his groin or near the bladder, then it requires that the painful parts be laid on his genitals; and they place the legs behind the back, and compresses its abdomen above the part beyond the back, and restricts him so much as he can. And therefore, it constrains the ligaments of the bladder below the expression in the hole.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must amend the extraction of all instruments called "syringe", for this reason: and be made of thin silver lightly drawn like a bird's feather; or a thorn from half a palm long and slender at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head with a little wool or cotton, and put one end inside the syringe; and collect the excess cloth and pour it down into the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and linen or beeswax, and make the patient sit on a chair, and lift up the bladder and urethra with moistened linen and olive oil.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then quickly insert the syringe into the penis, down to the root of the penis, then double it above the bulb; then push the syringe before the bladder and make the patient feel the urine coming out from that empty thing right away. This is not done in this order because if you insert the syringe where it goes around, then pull back the wool little by little and let the urine flow, and finally extract the urine;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and then retract the patient's limb.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scrapings or blood come into the bladder, and an accumulation is formed therein, you see it distill fluids and medicines, so make all instruments called "clyster" with this form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and it applies medicine with such a cloth in each hole that well suits the penis so that more moisture can be drawn out, and pushes out to the extent required.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines flowing into the bladder, put the chief cloth in the muscle so that it is held there; and draw out the traction to where it was inserted; if you pull out the moisture from the keg, then enter it back in, and forcefully push back the traction now, and when the moisture enters again, the patient will feel the bladder.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the delicate form of a clyster by which one clysters the bladder: it consists of (list specific components or design features that make up such an instrument).
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or gold; and at the top. And then take an uterine bladder, and put one cloth from .iij. In this cunfortune ce paien de lienblatte, et lesurne la pee, ailier:
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	i:lore
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	In the division of surgical methods, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said about the pierced joints in rains, and all signs, and that on such a pierce it must be worked to size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will clearly and briefly tell you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the pierced vein in the bladder happens more often in children, and it is a sign that an acute jump of the bladder seems as subtle; and hurts greatly the patient's leg, and many times falls; and for these jumps there are foundations; and recovery is light until they reach 24 years old, and it is very hard on elderly people, those who are between infancy and old age; and care is lighter for those with a large vein than for those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when it comes to treatment, the first step is to clarify the malady with clyster therapy, for administering everything that is in the intestines; because at times this can obstruct any attempt at piercing (intervention).
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the malady by the roots, and lift and move downwards to the stomach, if it descends into the bottom of the bladder, and never goes up above; then lay him down with his hands on his thighs so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then pierce and touch these areas.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the pierce in space, hurry to examine under it immediately. And if it does not hurt when touched with all instruments, then take your left index finger as an indicator of oil on the hand's side; if the malady is in infants, or if my signet ring moves, meaning that it has reached maturity; and fixate its foundation, and feel the pierce, and when you sense it under your own body, press it towards the collar of the bladder; then apply pressure on it until you see relief or drainage.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand and command him to extend his right arm upwards towards the edges of the cuts in the area where the size is being worked on; then he will expel the spatula-shaped instrument, which takes this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	. Latex leat's fromage. Theu pareil. Forstir (un and theer le: "paret. Thees ofges. In French:age, Leviagain. The15. :ge-later, andace : Getraie:age.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance the pressure is so strong that it pushes him out of its foundation, and he jumps with effort; and you know that there are joints or angles and margins: if they are tightly pressed to come out, as some have a groove-like appearance and roundness, and the exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	When there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not move, you must stretch with tongs that are as similar to a pizza cutter at the top, so that you can force the joint out without slipping; or throw underneath this subtle scissor-like instrument. And if you cannot insert it in such a way, then slightly enlarge that cavity, and if there is no decortication, then stretch with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one joints, first throw the largest into the neck of the bladder, then pull it out, and force it through, and if there are others, do so afterwards. And if it is very large, you must wrap it with silk and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: either he dies or his urine comes out again because the hairs cannot be sewn together; but in all cases I strive to remove the joints by pulling them apart piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it, and cover it with a linen napkin moistened with oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then re-bandage the patient on his neck, and do not remove the joint until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if the joint comes out well with oil and water, then treat it with laurel ointment and basil oil until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses appear in the wound and decalcifications of blood clots are present in the bladder, causing urine to be retained therein, such as with a suction effect: then do your work in that spot, remove the clot inside, because if it remains, the bladder will corrode; otherwise it may become porous.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with alum, silk, and catgut, and provide aid in all ways you see fit until it is healed; and ensure that all of the urine that you cure, you bind up those two legs, and assemble the medicines on the bandage.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the joint is small, and it is directed by a rodale de la vingledre: et si leu, et demeinche ains :sans lié :ceu que li reddaillé. Et cestres, et siens les bougé, parole ascles du, au franç à l'arbrees in the textures .i.e leu lait. French fromes:rein aire, 12ndreverses:entire. Theurs : A.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	screwage:123esubartentoc medicalises,biense:ite by:gacharde toit:0representements;fracture;nascuerde.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a needle and thread it around the branch above the wound, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then thrust the needle gently along the vein, until it enters the wound; and turn the needle in your hand to the wound repeatedly, as much as you can pierce the wound from another side. If at once urine comes out, then press your hand on that which is delayed behind the wound inside the vein. Then it becomes broken, jumps with the urine, and causes great pain for the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do it for any reason that prevents it, then take a needle inside the wound and another above it, then make the vein at the location of the wound between those two points, thrust the needle forcefully, pull out the thread, and retract the line, and warm the frozen blood in the wound until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from a woman's wound
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a wound in women is jaundiced, and if it does happen, it is considered grievous; for three reasons: one is that by chance the woman may become a virgin; and the second is that it becomes difficult to find a woman who can openly confess about such matters, especially when she has attained chastity.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that by chance there may not be a woman who can understand this art of handwork; and the fourth way is that the wound in a woman's body is deeper than one in a man' Written by: [Your Name]
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to consider this, it must be that you choose a wise woman who understands the task well and knows how to handle an instrument properly; and if you do not find such a skilled woman, there is no subtle castewoman in life, or a woman who understands part of the art, and commands her to perform what you command from the examination of the wound.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And observe carefully whether the woman is a virgin: in that case, it must be to press her private parts or foundations and examine the wound; if she covers them, then binds her foundation firmly, and commands her to do so over her wound or with the malaise, and holds her left hand on the bladder formed.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she covers the wound in the part of the wound. Si lace deffendut que ies le veintesson parole, et estuet sié, et cestan veneur lavergaument les plus choses qui ille auge: desusse nl' :, andreins.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then place the rib in the waist, if you feel that it is pierced so much that the wound can be drawn out until the hole allows, and know that there are many methods of stabbing: namely small and large, sharp and heavy, long and round, and which have rings. If you know the similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it does not heal on its own, put vitriol boiled in wine and apply heat for an hour until the wound is unhealed; then return to your work until the hole is strong enough, and use the dressings I have mentioned beforehand in the extraction of the wound as others will help you with this task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not heal on its own (if the artery is punctured), then apply powder and bandages to the wound'ited area, and do not repeat this action again, and let the wound alone without drawing blood from it; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is relieved and the bleeding stopped, then return to your work (operations), until the wound has fully healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia, referring to the condition when abdominal contents protrude through a weakened area in the abdominal wall. (Note: 'carnose' here means flesh-like or swollen, describing the appearance of a hernial sac.)
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rarely is this not simply a moist or white fibrous layer within the umbilical cord, which contains the blood cells of the fetus (commonly referred to as "fibrous tissue" and named "white fibrous layer"), and it should not be properly woven into the body's flesh. However, if we consider this matter as a different operation, then this is indeed leather-like material between white fibrous layers that we have previously mentioned; and this does occur in some cases (referring to potential complications such as herniation of the umbilical cord contents).
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this layer (fibrous cord) consists of a delicate material that is spread throughout it. (Note: 'Generation' in this context refers to the process or development of the fibrous cord structure.)
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there is never the case of it being due to percussion upon the blood vessels, and this moisture has many colors: whether it declines towards a yellowish hue, or lacks redness, or blacks out, or appears as white aquatic (referring to possible color changes in the fibrous tissue). It is more likely.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And this is the sign of knowing that assembly (knowing there is fibrous tissue), for if it is indeed the white fibrous layer we have mentioned, then it has turned into pieces or fragments, like an operation, and does not open the blood vessels, because it has become moist throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if the tieles.iification of lee tiels.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	deuconse ieu:saindeuce
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after this insertion, judge what is inside there.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure them with iron, it is required that the maladies be healed as much as possible and the filling of their hearts; then they are placed on their backs, on something a little high, and put many layers of cloth over them.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then they are placed on their left side, and command the minister to place them on the right hand, and extend the rod to one of the two sides where the cords cross each other.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula in hand and scrape off the cords among them until near the thorn, and make a straight incision to see whether the cords are white up to that point, and scrape gently according to what is possible.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white patch with water in one large puncture, and draw out all the water, and then put onions upon it, and let the white patch protrude above; and do not touch the thorns of the cords, but just the white patch itself, that if you break up its side too much, some of the blood will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood flows freely while you perform your work, then bandage it up when you have completed the white patch; then assemble the two thorns of the cords in a common seam, and treat it as for other wounds, until it is sound again.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	devreintipheardecans,sante (it'acques
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the blood is assembled in two parts, you know that it are joints; if the other part copies exactly as the first one, then suck out the fluid from the wound, and place a clean linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another clean linen soaked in wine and oil on top of them, and put above the joints, and overdressed with double cloth, and lay it according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths and cut the linen into this shape and join them together at the waistband of the trousers, and one strip hangs down from the foundation to the back, and the other covers the groin area; and the second piece is placed over the shoulders, and all gathered in a loop around the belt.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and there is never a time when this rod of cautery in the size of iron is applied directly to the patient's skin, and you must use one slender cautery, and cover the joint with leather, and dress it as we have said before, so that the white substance containing water can be exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white substance of blood, and scrape it with this slender cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And in all the ways you can do it, as long as you keep everything together; and make sure that no feather touches the open wound; and know that this work is safer; and move without causing dislocation of the blood, and mourn over the sizes.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything makes you go against this method or causes dislocation of the blood or any other thing, then treat what goes contrary to it according to what is said before;
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the pain is fearful and it does not want to wait for this work because of its horrifying nature, then provide a puncture as I have told you, and ensure that when you are well-informed by our meanings that we have discussed which indicates such a piece of linen should be used;
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If the pain is to be found in that piece of linen soignee enceinte.i. ceste veinne desemale, et chascun vint defface laine fine:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the wound, and apply it to the wet area, and let the healing process of the water proceed, then treat it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the blood does not come out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you insert a needle or the instrument used to drain fluid from abscesses, as shown here before; and slightly enlarge the wound, check that the fluid returns, and after two to three months or so, when it has assembled like this, then the painful symptoms will pass in these days.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the incision of abscesses
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	It checks whether in this part of the recipe there are several predispositions, which seems to me that it should be left alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the work and similar cases regarding the incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Now I say that many incisions come out of it, and mainly with pus; and this happens quite often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It's known by surplus sourness and moisture, which is spread through the pus, or from hitting;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And the color of the incision according to the condition of the blood vessels; and it does not cause pain, and is considered a serious injury.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance are some incised wounds painful and swollen, and of a reddish hue, and never comes from any artery or vein opening;
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it comes from any artery, it is compressed by the arrangement of the incision if you press on it.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it does not require you to touch;
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	This one which is made of swelling of veins is pressed by its position to express tender pain on both sides.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can well perform the incision in this manner, and on the others as well.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it's that you handle the key of joints first, then remove them from above, and treat them with white ointment, and release the suspensory ligaments from all parts of the upper body.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the upper body is already in these needy conditions, then it's necessary that you treat the upper body and handle the key of joints.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is in the ointment or within the vessels where they are located, then it's necessary to release all those attached tissues and handle them with a round approach.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the cartilage is at the back, it requires that you cover it entirely, and extract the flesh as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the tasks are completed, apply a soft wool cloth with rose oil and wine to the wound, then attend to other treatments until he is well again.
de l’aposteme des coions	of incision on arrows
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an incision wrapped with a wrapping resembling one of the following: i. boilings, accompanied by softening of the abscesses.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	And when it hurts so much that he cries.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And the treatment of this disease is equally feared as this one mentioned here before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And therefore we will tell you the workings of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It requires that you place the patient on a low seat, and then let down the syringe of pus below his necessary levels.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	all of those near the belly and the body, and tighten the master's stomach, and they form into it.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then remove sharply large pieces from that area where the vessels are exposed until they no longer appear.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are within temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert a double pin in it, and fix it firmly on the first part of his head orde, and it is come, and place to the second.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	incoin on ite.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	:meinthe decade dea: The king 13rdise aoutilent thees. Andrever.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	x
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If it does not lose its crying due to the incision of veins, and they are dried up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the surgical procedure
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The treatment of this branch if it comes down to cautery or stretching on the belly in the part of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend from that course to one of its branches.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this procedure is either cautery or stretching and they come from various reasons: either by striking, jumping, crying out loud, or lifting a burden, as well as similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And when it is related to stretching of cautery, it happens little by little over a long time and does not suddenly appear.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it is also the abscesses that extend towards the arteries because cautery presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's related to the section of cautery, where they bring about sudden pain at the beginning and various appearances on the surface near the skin; this is due to the discharge from the intestines and the depletion of the liver caused by the cautery.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And it has never been combined with the intestines there is no containment and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed immediately.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron for fear that it might be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of this work is that you command or cauterize so as to resect the intestine in its midst in the wound if it can be retracted.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Or it may be sown upon its neck above your hands, and relieve the joints.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then are the keys upwards, and cover all the skin around long veins.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then put them down in the books about opening the abdomen according to what you know how to do to open the wound, and such that they can be drawn out of it.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the skin over the joints where there are hair follicles, until all parts of it are exposed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then put your indication here that teaches the joint, in which there is the white skin over the abdominal cavity, and between the second skin.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And go behind the abdomen, and between the second skin. And move your right hand in front of the joints, with the white skin at top to your left hand, and lift the abdomen towards all the joints toward the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and move that which is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And ask you to see if there is an intestinal wrapping or hard white skin over it, and if you do not find anything, then put it in the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take an instrument or have a thick thread made of such threads, and put it in the back part of the skin where there is after the skin of the joints; behind the waist, then tie the ends together for three threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then bring them together in a way like a cross, and tie the skin where there is over the joints' skin with a strong line of three parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the ends of the threads together with three parts, so that no one can untie them by applying pressure to the stitching point, which does not move.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And put the main line according to the first line of three parts, and after these three lines leave the skin where there is over the joints' skin a great part of that.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all according to the curve that it bears; then tie in the part which is on the skin around the joints, where there are no corners and turns as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply a loose cloth in oil, and put the wound, and bind the line that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And nevertheless you should not cauterize the white skin over the joints that we have said after the incision due to discharge of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because this happens often, and leave the line so that itchickens will not break. And if it is hot water as we have said.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	Hernia carnosus
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this instance, I have never seen anyone attempt to treat with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old said that it is made in such a way as if the screws are assembled to pull them together, after cutting into their grooves lightly.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cover me too, and heal the abscess that operates there, until the screws grow hairs; and do so as we have said, until they are completely healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Never does the rotten hernia appear again, as we have said, and he opens it; and no one finds any mixture of intestines in there, and if it is found, it's little, and recovers all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in every case, if it lingers too long on this point, they believe the wound or Syphilis, as long as the intestines remain there.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this occurs through the extension of that ulcer which is within the hernia, as we have said, because it extends, then becomes softened and swollen in there, and opens up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And this is treated with cautery, as we have said before; and there has never been a cure by iron in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And it becomes a heavy burden on his shoulders between your hands, then cover the hernia of the enlarged mass according to its quantity in three doses (the "iiij" is likely an error and should be "three").
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the ulcer that is thereunder the skin which it follows, and take down its right side and place it next to the apparent ulcer.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press at the point of the abdomen where the two ulcers appear on top of the repair, and count them both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the joint, and do not cover the sinew or extend the upper part or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of dislocating the bowels.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then heals by treating wounds. And when you treat the threads, if they break and heal the wound, so long as it is sound.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is constricted and has no appearance in the procedure, and the caustic is melted into this place, and next to it are salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the joints is softened in some people because the components within are easily softened and visible; it's necessary to know when to cure this, that you lay the ill-tempered part on its back, and you pull the already softened leather from the natural leather. Then take two fingers under a seam, and if you see any superfluous softened leather at these or other seams, then cut it off firmly in either two or three places; then suture between the seams, and cure it as for other wounds until it is sound, and bind the threads.
dou chastrement	of cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	"Saiches que chastremens est escomieniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre...Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre..."
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermophrodite is according to some methods: one such method involves the genital openings resembling a woman's figure with hair and sometimes even inoculating urine; the other method is for women, similar to having a rod under their pubis as well, and treating all corresponding injuries. The treatment of wounds and abdomen according to this second method involves applying salves or remedies applied directly to such openings where pus may have burst from the genitalia, without any specific cure for it.
de la tentigene	In the context of your request, "tentigene" does not directly appear within the provided translation segment. However, if we were to explore related historical medical concepts that could align with this term, it might refer to "gestation," which is a biological process related to pregnancy and fetal development. Given that hermaphrodites can potentially present unique reproductive scenarios, but since "tentigene" isn't part of the provided Old French excerpt, there seems to be no direct translation link in this specific text snippet.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Gestation is a char applied to the natural part as long as it's too ugly to see; and many women have also had such excessive amounts as if with one hand, and this treatment requires that you drain the superfluous gestation from your hand or palms, applying it lightly so they don’t bleed. You should avoid going too far in a procedure, lest blood vessels become damaged, then treat until healed; and another condition wherein the fetus is born through the mouth of the womb, and applies it, and sometimes leaps out, and according to its appearance, they called this "kowe disease." It requires you to treat such gestation as we have described, and care for it so long as it remains healthy.
de erratique	In this context, the term "erratique" in Old French translates to "erratic" in English. In a general sense, it refers to something irregular or inconsistent. If we consider medieval medicine, an "erratique" procedure would imply treatments that are non-standard and lacking consistency with established medical norms of the time.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	When the dislocation of the shoulder joint occurs due to moisture and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocation happens when a joint moves out of its natural position, preventing it from moving, and the limb appears misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. The occurrence of dislocation is not due to any particular connection at the hip; if it is close or adjacent, it becomes apparent near the hips or thighs. It determines conception and childbirth, as well as chance encounters with subtle love or magic stings, which appear on the skin in various places such as the marrow, bones, inside, etc.; then take woolen threads, moisten them with oil, put them under the dislocation, and dress the woman at home every day so that it can heal. And if the subtle love or sting is hard and sharp, you must first cover the puncture with a large cotton cloth wide enough to prevent the wound from closing; then treat for other cures as long as heals well. When it comes in marrow, according to this manner, unless there are ingrown hairs. For an incision in bone ingrown hairs should not be touched by iron.
des emorroides	Embarrassing hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are overtures of veins which have become accustomed to moisture without corticosteroid treatment and when they become old, they turn into tumors (thelul). We said in the division of symptoms that these are signs, and I will say here those who receive curative care. It is necessary then for you to put the woman in a cold room, hold the woolen thread around her roots, and soak it in medicated saltwater; likewise with salve made from dragon's blood, incense, and other things; let them stand for an hour, then place them in cool water; when these swellings of tissue arise, it is good to make a decoction of sumac bark, grape pomace ashwagandha root powder, and the leaves of gales and other things, and then take flour made from rye and mix it with honey and sawdust; put it on her back. And if they are not painful, you can inflate them with leather gloves that do not hurt the skin; then apply linen, and melt plantain juice or beech sap vinegar, and apply to the wounds of the vein, and care for the hemorrhoids so long as they are healed. When the stinging nettle appears red, it is hard, and resembles one's chiefly rough.
des apostemes de la marris	Hemorhoi togear les vaisse dese leu lesnei d’ameas lespite ofemens iains:lous la merle ofnent of meince caudement asmea :meant.meïses.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	ifsisocelancrenernece the craconseanseurifolder (
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The profession is first in the matter of childbirth that she knows the natural figure of delivery, and when you see her pushing downwards, and desiring to smell the aroma, then it indicates that those children are born according to their natural form, and they come out with their head above them; and when you observe these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her abdomen so that the child comes quickly. For if he emerges from his head, the second stage with him begins, and there is much pain in the superfluous parts due to proper realignment; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. Because it never goes up their legs, but rather through their shoulders or arms, and it gets turned by accident on its side, and other unfortunate forms; that is why it is a matter of skill for her to be alert and skilled in these things, and she should be aware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the figures mentioned as ones to assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes from its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with groaning, and his strength is weak; then let him sit on a chair or have women hold him; and if he has a nature like oil or fenugreek cooked, and they pour the labor between his thighs where there is this little spasm, which form it:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And split the second stage, and hold his unborn child tight as long as the moisturizers are applied to its fur; and press the woman'e abdomen until the baby is born, and if it does not emerge, then you must clothe the woman with fenugreek mucus mixed with olive oil for one hour. Then bind and cough her up; and when these two hands come forth forcefully, you must lightly press them a couple of times; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, elevating her feet; then remove the chair from the ground, and treat the woman so that she does not soil herself at standing; and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, clothe the baby in this cloth which is before you placed, extract the infant by tearing it out gently, and afterwards cleanse it.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the issue of the child from its legs
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes from its legs, then it must be pushed upwards:
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it very gently, as long as he is still small:
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then he needs to pinch and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump just as legs, if commanded to press and make him sternum expand?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if not as we have said, turn bit by bit until he is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For when there is ligamentation.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if not as we have said, take a marrow of bone, and oil of sulfur, and melted wax, and grind all in one mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	And place it upon the woman's body near and below this ointment.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then let it be done above water until down below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is warmed up there, then he makes a little mirror of myrrh and puts it over her and leaves for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then have it done on a seat, then he makes her sternum expand and holds back her mouth and nostrils, and presses the belly gently, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the issue of the child from his thighs.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands bit by bit.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then she is laid upon her neck, and let her legs go downwards, and be lying on the ground.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And bend his hands little by little, and then he presses them on the belly, and holds the stones inside him while she is below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	Here comes: oun.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	ilike. Theil. (1403. Whatis,le. 120:age andre in itent. Commentary. Here fromage. :l thefleurine; Age. Itail. Fornage. Andresque lice. I’sung toc:
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the child born with a large hand, causing difficulty moving (Note: The provided Old French text seems to mix different topics. Here is an attempt based on the given excerpt only.)
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I invite to bring back the hand: (Note: This line appears out of context based on the provided excerpt. The phrase is translated into English, but without additional information from the text it may not fully capture its intended meaning.)
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be brought back, then lift up the woman and go: (Note: This line also appears out of context based on the provided excerpt. The phrase is translated into English, but without additional information from the text it may not fully capture its intended meaning.)
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot go, then make her lie down on a bed and straighten out the legs: (Note: This line seems to be related to medical instruction but again appears context-dependent. The translation into English is provided based on what's given.)
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then treat the mice that I have told you about: (Note: This line seems unrelated to the medical text, possibly a reference or an analogy within the context. It has been translated as instructed.)
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not bear offspring, then make her sit on a chair and study how to bring back the hand: (Note: This line appears to be part of an instructional sequence based on the medical context provided in the previous lines. The translation into English reflects that interpretation.)
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And raise the child according to natural form, and make her cough, commanding her to hold it so that it expels any fluid: (Note: This line seems related to care instructions after a medical procedure or event. The translation into English follows from the context.)
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child on his back, and extend her arms, turning her face towards her mother: (Note: This line could be part of post-procedure care or observation instructions. Translated into English for clarity.)
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I invite that the ball tightens her hand, then turns it slowly and slightly, and the woman moves lightly: (Note: This line might be illustrating an exercise or a care technique. Translated as per instruction.)
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is levelled out, then place the mouse on its back and oil it as we have said, and command her to move little by little: (Note: This line refers to a process in animal care or treatment. Translated accordingly.)
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to hold it; and make her cough: (Note: This line continues the care instructions from earlier lines, translated into English for consistency.)
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this manner for all the second time: (Note: The final line appears as an instruction to repeat a process. Translated into English maintaining context with prior text.)
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this manner for the second time, if you clean up the second layer with oil until all the moisture is gone: (Note: This line refers to a repeated process of caring or treatment, translated into English.)
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child' Cooks down her face and chest, let her be washed so that it does not hold back breathing, and it dies: (Note: This line seems to describe a specific medical situation. Translated into English.)
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child back in as much as you have placed it, and command the woman that she never again: (Note: The translation might be slightly off due to the context of this text. 13th century English medical manuscript dated line byline 12th century France.)
adonques si istra legierement.	In the early 14th century.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Separates that are twins often born, and they never do so in pairs of two or three; this is not an experience known to occur, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are experienced things, and they never live long enough for names to be given;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiple, and they suffer from the syndrome which conceives them, which is bound to humidity.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And they never emerge naturally as everyone else does, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they emerge groaning, then the treatment as we have described it, and should be a subtle balance of doing what needs to be done swiftly and lightly.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And do so as it would deserve to be honored.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	They are never formed in the marshes; they may be one or two or three or four or five or more and made to take shape like a child according to the measure of divine grace.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it must be acknowledged that healing maintains everything, as by chance such things often occur.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If done according to what it necessitates.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman from whom the dead child or womb has come, as I have said in its division, and it does not spill forth again, then you are obliged to labor with your hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary that you know whether the woman has sound health or if she suffers from fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary that the woman be leaning upon her back, and her legs inclined upwards, and her feet raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister of .iiij. parts, or if she is lying down so that it can be extracted from the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	aille.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then they throw it into the mud violently, then striking one or both places where it can be recovered with such force.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take care that the child's wound is drawn out from its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you strike the wound in the ears, neck, mouth, throat, or beard, or even on the patient's shoulders.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if during these measures, he lies on his feet, then strike him with a stick and beat the sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is essential that you bleed the wound with your right hand, placing pressure between his left fingers in the other hand, and then blow or strike all over his body vigorously, until we have mentioned these places where the wound may be found, while he remains empty of blood;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the wound:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then find another wound, if you have treated it in your practice, and the extraction is equal ('estragaigalz').
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then they are equal in movement from one side and the other, so that it can be pulled out, and their teeth should hold as much if the shape allows.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, if it is bleeding any of its two sides ('dos'), then apply pressure to that side and strike the other side.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there are no more signs of it (wound), place this wound or higher up and treat it as much until the blood stops flowing ('tant qu'il s'en isse').
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot return by compression,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And you must first wrap it under one sheet, so that it heals completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then bind the bandage at the sole of the foot or in the area above it, and this requires you to do it with both hands, on each foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if a child's shoulder is large and dislocated in the exit, or it has an acute accumulation.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	It is required that you insert a splint under your thighs and perform the head treatment and extract the accumulation.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you wrap it around the instrument called "almidach," since its shape comes from the staff or the person who follows that.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And in such cases, make sure the child naturally with a great head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	And then pull out the bones with tongs.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the child's joints were forced and it is resistant to the tongs, as long as the moisture has been or caused to be;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot emerge, then wrap it in pieces with what you can do;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the sides, this requires that you pierce as much as the fluids correspond;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on his legs, then there are light attractions to the mouth of the mother, and healing lightly;
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is found on the belly or in the womb, then it must be extracted with one sheet wrapped under the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and makes the belly or the womb while the moisture that is there remains.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if other limbs are broken, and they remain fractured.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and he binds his hand in a pouch made of wicker (marris), and draws it out through the mouth.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he draws out one or two, and they are drawn out (fur).
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the wicker pouch is opened by pulling out (aposteme), which prevents it from being treated, then there is no need to work on it.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	instead, it must be equipped with wet and greasy things (amenistrer);
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the moistening substances are placed inside (emplaustres), and see them as softening and slippery (aigu mollifians et amoistans).
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the wound is on its side, and you can put it there (igal), as we have described in a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	but if one cannot do it (tract), then the drawing is done in parts, and nothing from the second line should be left behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this (fait), then the moistening substances that we have mentioned in previous treatments are placed into these abscesses which come into the wicker container.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood comes out, it is placed in a restrictive liquid, and the other treatments are given (aministré).
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman whose womb had contained an infant, then she placed another on him, and the other child's death was prevented (consuet).
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long days he came upon one abscess in the swelling, which expanded so much that it opened, and began with great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to call for treatment, and thought long on it, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it under strong magnetism, and drew out an bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was troubled much because there is no bone in the abdomen.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I treated the wound and with my hands extracted bone until she reached her best point.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman stayed there long afterward, and it remained as two pounds of lead on her leg;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I do not remember this chapter because whenever the master performs an extraordinary procedure, he knows how to assist.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	Two times bringing back to his bed
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And then came the pressure form, which caused us to open the books; and at this point we tore away some of the leather straps.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Overall, the restriction was somewhat more subtle, and it consisted of ropes or boxes.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And it was also a hole in the wood about one and a half feet wide, and its margin like that of trees, so it had to be dug deep, and by longhands...
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And besides these two alignments made by this method were tightened in both directions, which were half a footlong or one more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	nge ia curexterregessexcameleves tolmeafeille sevrectiflessoing fementeurentheissexible, an:maudecte for a gredeletrecthundericavourtioffernevavocestrukengreve laithexterre
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, shall be made of elmwood or box wood, according to the shape of the pincers.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And they shall be two-jointed joints, like you see, with one hand's length long and the other wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see opening the marrow to all parts of the instrument, let it sit on one leg, and hold the legs together.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then place the two-jointed joints side by side in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on all parts of the instrument, just as you have made the pincers evenly, according to the quantity that shows how much opening has been done in the marrow's mouth, until it opens by itself as it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all shaped and has many similarities; and the more marrow it has available, the faster the work will be done, and taller for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument if you have not made it; because their needs are undeniable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second childbirth occurs, it must be that you command the woman to retain her hair, and then she shall forcefully expel air from her body, and hold your hands in front of her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she does so, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take a pot and make a puncture or cup-shaped cut, and put therein herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, as in cupping therapy, juniper, chamomile, camphor, calamint, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water above the fire; then place a cup or puncture under the boiling vessel, and put the other end into the mouth of the marrow.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And the smoke will fill up in the marrow as much as you want; then make her exhale, as we have said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it does so during her second labor.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not weakened, then you shall command the baby to suck her left hand in oil of juniper or lamb's fat, and then place it back into the marrow.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And it will be the second childbirth; and when she finds her hairs, and hold them tightly, so that thou hale.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must move lightly to the right and left, and then slip away if it comes and dislocates.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the patient's mouth is torn, we have said the treatment of opening and rubbing with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all that we have said, then keep you from drawing out too much.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is to be known that what is in the mouth of the woman, you should place on her thighs, then perform the rectal cleansing with four pharmacological treatments.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if she brings it and relocates, but all the same, when it causes a bad smell in the stomach and on the head, and cuts off the evil breath.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	For it is now to be known that there are effective smokes for this, and none of the ancient have tried smoking chicory or dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument to be used for smoking the woman with flowers and seeds, this is it:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And is to be seen as if it were like a cane, and put the head subtly in its nature, and the wide joints near the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And for the smokes with coal, and when it is spent, restart another one.
de percier lou fondement	of the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	And children are born who have not perceived the foundation, but instead have a subtle secret faculty:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	And it is now to be seen that she perceives the subtle faculty of her due, and not much sharply, and protects him from touching.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a thin vein under linen soaked in oil and water, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will reattach, put or pierce a small hole in the body, and let the hands heal for days, and support him when he feels the need to go to bedrooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is never a time for such salves or incision healings; it must cover the healing well: whether you treat it, as we have said regarding the small hole in the body.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the foundation base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	From the foundation come fistulas that swell up, and these are larger than those which come from near the foundation or within two finger-widths of it.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more such fistulas; and when the swelling up of that has been occurring for a long time, then you must work on it with forceful drainage or slightly elevated position.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these persistent fistulas are known because of what they have or do not have in terms of evacuation (egestion) or discharge (ventositivity); and sometimes they jump from one place to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder and a large part of the urethra; and they reach the juncture of the vagina and anus, and to some extent extend into the abdomen.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	Andalusian peccadence.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	nastel. La:
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting dislocation, or a fine layer of cloth underneath, or a horsehair, so long as you feel the cloth or hair in its proper place;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no opening for evacuation or blowing out, as we have said before.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	You know that it does not pierce; if you rush too quickly with the cautery.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is just above the bladder or along the urethra where urine passes through, and it cannot be alleviated by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived just at the juncture of the hip, then the cloth or hair extends up to its proper place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting dislocation and the creation of pain does not occur, then it is already too late for medicine or any form of mending by poulticing.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas there is no relief to be found through labor; it becomes a source of envy for those who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for healing by cautery, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And it causes great pain between your hands on its back; and the legs up to their hips, and inclines the hips towards the abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then you apply a layer of rain or moisture if there is twisting dislocation, as long as you can feel the layer in its proper place.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the pain is felt near its foundation, it means you must cut your finger index.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	If you feel that the cloth or hair has pierced it; and whether there is a sheath exposed between your thighs or pubic area, which indicates that it is persistent.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there is no work done on it that could possibly heal it.   Written in English:
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	However, there is some that can still be well-treated; but it happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And if it is done properly with the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And he pours hot in the fistula as long as it is below its foundation; and makes these misaligned parts look like a quail's plume.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	sente ia iai:lègare bonnaudectifiers;nchevecteurope:xungenatheverne :essevelongiagre,cribe anderme and heurexqueleturgeon, sevrevantiocoughrale
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is so healthy at this time, it is well. As for that, there is no other way to be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if he attempts to enter between, and does not penetrate where it should be, and there is thick armor or shield over your right side and under the tent, and you see an opening in that covering which teaches strength of breaking.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the cutter begins at the opening of the fistula, and then pushes away from under the tent, and with fire cauterization afterwards until it bends to the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And will be delivered the tent and taken away; then it removes those faulty shields which seem like a feather's pen.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you do not succeed, and cuts between you and the pasture, then he burns or medicates with fire or water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cutter assembles two things to know: namely, the alignment of these shields and the separation of blood and moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then it heals wet or melted waxen tents in the bowels of the fire, until it allows his hairs to fall away from the bow. And then it pushes down on the shields with the bow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then it heals the wounds on those who are still covered in wax; and these medications are drying.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Treatise de lice devisement en ce.  ́troi it'sne ̵nin the  ́savintractaime apremongreve thefeaturing in thete  3-faire métre delems  ́: The French 12eave méanre of it'ratheres.  ́ce lemonede:2ndence, andvague. �umalice's13rdragger.tracture ailte :caracter:50:3rdicate fromage.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	surexable. (translate:sacre itape:caisse andr :1tecte thecesse;sesce devoi;repeace.sangurle laisser.gaugevesse, heaveillec’ilustre lemonde quasblement.tandre
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the veil and there is an opening where blood flows or arrows are lodged, if it has only signs of hope and expectation, through one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	You either perform it as we have mentioned before, or you drain the fluid right away, or if you place veils and treat it similarly to what we initially did.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not apply too much pressure, so as not to disrupt the foundation that holds it all together, and raise the lifting by mere will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then treat it, as we have said before.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance it may be cured, or you remove that concealed covering and the wound after drainage from its base, or by veil or another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then mend that most necessary part within the wound as you can do it.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study to restore the wound and delay the abscess in its more distant part from the foundation, which is an easier task for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there are abscesses in this manner never: and when you insert the veil into the abscess, it is on the edge of the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If you take a veil to be inserted at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert one of these thin wires, and place the vein in all its length within the abscess as long as it remains at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is stretched along the margin of the foundation therein, then extract that piercing wire from within the abscess so that you can place your vein.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And take away the head of both wires and join them together, holding them tightly against each other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And do not loosen the wire at all during this time, provided that it has these characters between which are inserted: two arrows in a row.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound as long as it is sealed and healing.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the abscess does not pierce, you may puncture it in all ways that you can do, provided that it is not overly pressed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he does not require puncturing even if it were overdone, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The spatulate form of the spinous vertebrae from which they make the abscess if it is very large and consists of a part and a fragment.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, because we do not puncture that which we should not puncture, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of discharges
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Sorrows arise from two main actions: or they are located in the foundation, like grains of resin, and whether they are small or large, and then blood flows.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And if there is one or more, they are removed from the foundation and the main foundation; but those that have little moisture remain.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And then there may be a little yellow or a little blood, and they have the same color as the heart.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them in the foundation, if you command the patient that they should be stretched out to allow air into the chambers, until the foundations are filled with blood and the fetus appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and hold it with tongs, or you keep it in your hand, then cut into its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if one finger cannot hold them due to its moisture, then they take it with one sheet of linen, or from a cloth, or from a piece of calico.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract them from your places, and put them back, and powder above any warm powders that are on the lancet.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you cauterize them as it is said or by the lancet's master, then treat with other treatments until he becomes healthy.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundations cannot come out, then you should administer an abrasive enema to the patient and use it vigorously for washing that which is the foundation, so that he can emerge completely.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Can the maladies be foreseen, and when the fetus is in the foundation, then it requires light care.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And do you foresee them in your hand or with tongs, and cut, then treat as we have said, so that he remains healthy until completely recovered, and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If thou hast the needle of ceste: entree, et en ce qui vau. coment la plume demeins. aue de meineur: est. Orgéte desoleuere nativre. Oui. Itaillustrissime courtesemale auge.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and hold the wire firmly, then unwind the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others likewise, and leave one inlet to correct any excess blood flow;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on top of the foundation. I. a damp cloth or wax-covered board, and put on top of the foundation, and order the patient to lie down.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let them defecate, and when they have been cleaned, carry out the treatment of cleansing and other treatments until he is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Twice as often or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times occur suddenly in the intestines, and due to a natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not apply.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary to revive the pressure of an abscess or the peel above its skin that does not allow moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat until he is well if it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if he cannot be settled, then renew the removal more vigorously than before, until he is much healthier and his skin is scraped.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is well.
dou fremit	Double fremit (Fremitus)
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Fremitus appears to be a superfluous vibration before the heartbeat and goes on much.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And there is never the tightening of blood in the heart, and it feels to him like a fremitus that spreads throughout the whole body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a cane of one inch long or a strong pinwortle (a type of medical instrument), and place that cainne on the fremitus so that the purple circles become completely enveloped by it.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around the cane entirely within the fremitus, and put it in motion, and scrape away the fremit from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it done, as a cane of iron or wood in this shape, and lightly placed above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And never touch it, so that he may hold in both hands; if you see, then cauterize the fremitus, as the barber's knife is to it.
de la forme dou clistere	The form of cauterization, and whether in English healecture les en ouses le castres leu d’la veinence.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	:waxe ceteriales leves it'elong ous: "molue (13renchin. Theil fromage. Aouturean:en andre. Comment 1000.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	This then instructs us in the treatment of children and those who are frail and sorrowful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of this little enema is very wide, or the abdomen is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a distension or the abdomen is tied as you see, and the belly button is pierced therein; and in one side of the chest ... i cut, and on the other ... j.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and either the abdomen or it has a flask full of the best medicine or wax poured inside, and pierced all over with tiny holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and among each of these holes it must have space, then insert a strong thread into them ... i., twisting the threads in ... x or around ... y as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if the tie is on the instrument in front of a strong thread ... then enema; and it takes the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And the medicine is not too hot nor too cold, and the head of the enema is coated with oil or honey, or something similar, then it pours in gently:
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the enema is squeezed out by its ministers with their two hands, until it's all gone, and then extract the enema, and lay down the sick person on his back:
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if it rests all night long, then it is greater aid:
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema it in cases of abdominal diarrhea, and the medicine accelerates its discharge, then the recovery begins as long as he is healthy:
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if there are fistula or abscess, then it is also done gently as for a child:
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the shape of this gentle enema which constricts the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	In the division of wound care; or we will say about hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made; and according to the causes or types of wounds, and for this reason they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things made for wounds due to movement of the body (gesture), cutting with sword and knife, or axe and hammer, or other similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or according to the causes of wounds—such as those that affect the neck (under the collar), head, arm, waist, liver, and other limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and in my treatise on simple head injuries; because this subject comes up in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head or neck, and the bone is not broken; but if it's due to a blow of the body or other similar things, then the skin is completely torn apart, and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you have slight doubt as to the appropriateneness of incision: if it heals quickly at first from head injuries (cephalic), especially if there is little blood loss from the wound itself, and if this quick healing occurs in opposition to the lower part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And rejects the malicious overindulgence in wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not show improvement, then his meat should be reduced, and he should neither drink wine nor eat barley.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply it to the wound if there is a discharge coming out of it, dressing with cloth soaked in rose oil or strong wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no discharge coming from the wound, and itchernes. I say of le chalitgement de la plaie en fiefs d'art.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrow has been moved, then apply some ointments on it until he is well again.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot come together due to tightness, then they may be brought together by bandage, just as I will say of sores on the abdomen caused by a stitch.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone and bleeding occurs, and it only holds for a short time before closing up, then treat the wound with medicine and restore firmness in its location using leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large meats if we test and cook wheat or barley as well as poultry, just like other things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you treat or change the leather for purulence and it does not hold to the bone, then close up the whole purulent area and apply treatment.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if the patient has an abscess or vein infection without cautery, and he cannot stop it with medicine alone, then whether you open the abscess or vein, and if you loosen the thrombus by cutting a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help at all, then you should perform the cautery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and let you apply this powder which sets so that the arrow has moved again.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way to make this powder is as follows: take holy incense for one part; blood from a dragon for two parts; live copper for three parts, and mix it subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply it to the wound, forming it so that it heals well and joins back with all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then let it settle well, and allow it to liquefy if it does not swell; because we do not cauterize medicine while it is healing.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never make this solely with copper when you have neither the incense nor the blood from a dragon and if the arrow has not moved the wound again.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has moved the wound again, then immediately on this spot, no one should apply this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But apply any digested ointments or barley bread made of water and honey, so that it becomes soft.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with other remedies until he is well again.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	In ous, siens de cestomme.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you this after head fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the pain is in the neck and it's simple, if there's no distinction between it and that of the head fracture, but if the pain is in the neck or the artery is pierced.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the neck pain, if there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment and not impose any restriction, for it harms the neck and causes the muscles to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not to apply pressure on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its continued presence is associated with the head, which has more prominent limbs.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but if the medicines are strong, as in washing with gentle water and with rose oil, and also wetting it again with gentle water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other similar pebbles in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with linen cloths, and continue the treatment until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and festering and filled with blood, then pierce them more deeply or remove the clot.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is pierced, and blood begins to flow, then let us draw it out, and lend it a life, for the proper skill in cauterizing an artery.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine in the throat is pierced, or it tears, then hold them guarded so that the flesh does not go.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	seizure: "la douche theesme œuvres duke in chiefaise laisse en Français.  ether of the cei dessein lexin (1ere lesuaisme français: en France ouldr French: it'sre :lescriptures;"fierces theire. Acheut, thekesque. Celtique, in Frenchic "faire laissacour ether, lice,0leslas.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	siculeuise (thece:ssepeaidropse. Islaws itcèe :enjacresculesme:naturelle:s lax, and:saint.tifre aitse dextresse dekunche.sangles.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if he has pierced his wound in the bone, let it grow.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are bone fragments, let you drive all the nails into them, and those that cannot be driven in, let the wound heal as much as possible.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And displaced and misaligned it must be.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if his wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned earlier.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone and he has an abscess in the wound, treat it as I mentioned in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound of a spear or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's a wound from a spear or sword and the cut is deep, look at whether there's wind pressure in that area causing the patient'inasperable pain; understand clearly that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its flesh, do not apply the powder immediately in the first hour, nor bind it tightly to the flesh that will still bleed.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And draw out the blood from the body, and let loose the pain.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But apply an attractive dressing and tie it up several times during the day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you don't have dressing, place a lot of cotton to suck out the moisture from the wound.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 23 days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	And if there is no more spasm or severe tremors of the body not recurring again.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bone's positions, understand that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it with other remedies and care as long as he remains healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal and act, then you will know that it has an abscess; treat it as we should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if his wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or on the backside, treat as it should.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	La mephisez il nõgents ajustes :caus. Ceu jecte :lalongue :savresignes lichement :mein. What itesiage :mejacoult. Ipsum : Thejour deure ofrre : French: 130t :vomesures, :ce (copies in thefaire,5 - aumeasure andmeeting.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not swollen, let the wound grow, so that extraction becomes easier.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs we judge them similarly to what we have said before.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double dislocation, double abdomen collapse
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocations of the belly are large and dangerous, both great and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the large wound there is no mention of the intestine once, or it severs the intestines, since due to that invasion.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the suturing is more troublesome, and there is no time when the small wound was worse than the large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because that's why they are put back in repeatedly, if not constantly pulled out again.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestine inflames immediately upon feeling pain, so they return to being pulled out again.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because this same wound causes us to move the intestines back to their original position that we do not see in other cases.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And we know that the treatment of the belly involves three similar manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the three common suturing methods are used in the treatment of the belly.
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the treatment for other injuries on the body, such as cuts (and other corresponding treatments) are common like those of other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all other things are more proper with the belt around the waist, and I will say one thing and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I said that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has entered into it.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And a dislocation can be set by one of these movements:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	For the small size of the wound, if we have said so,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For this reason because the intestine is affected by pressure or trauma.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is affected or injured, treat it partially by the following methods:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	And for the moisture one cloth or similar, it is wetted solely with water.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you cook in fire and smoke and steam.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And raised the intestine as long as it grows round.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And it was never tightened too much, and is moved rather than pulled for unwinding.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the growth recede, if warm and gentle air or high heat are used on it,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	because by this it becomes light in few things.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then making a small cut with the instrument for removal of swellings, so they can be removed.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is movement rather than force.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut too forcefully, since there is no great necessity for it.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this relates to the splitting or division.
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts down into the cavity and does not heal quickly enough, then such a shape will result.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes (sauter),
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is set back into its natural place according to its original form ("naturel" meaning "natural"),
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have it, because this is beneficial ("vaut mues" meaning "it is worthwhile").
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it is located in the part of the abdomen ("le ventre"),
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	which implies that you should make the patient lie on their back ("faits gesir" translating to "have them lie") for proper positioning and healing of the wound in the abdominal area.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raises his legs higher than his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	And if it is located on the abdominal part,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	and raises both the head and the genitals above the surrounding areas.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also its abdominal route is in one of these segments.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	because the nape part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and hence it implies to provide what I have mentioned in large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Small wounds where the dressing has been applied.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then in your hands is one minister who inflames the entire abdominal route with his hand.
et assemble les levres;	and open your mouths.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and that is the common way to dress wounds.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	so you must choose a needle or several, depending on the size of the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave the head of the wound such that you give some space, and insert a needle or use one with a strong thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two holes in the hide with the two spearheads.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which are inside the skin where you perform that particular action.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and gather the two spearheads of the needles together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then thread one thick string through each of the spearheads.
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and assemble those two points of the wound in preparation.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave some space again, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	and then let the thread follow as you did with the first needle.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing so according to your expertise concerning needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	so that all the wounds remain controlled or confined within their limits.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let them be of various sizes, both subtle and large.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the small needles cover the entire wound area thoroughly, whereas the larger ones may not fit well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	and it implies that they should also be moderate in size:
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and let not the needles thrust too far into the flesh and skin of the wound;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and they do not cut or open the wound before sealing it with a seam.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then they pierce the shoulder with needles, so that it does not bleed while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I place tenting or bandages on the shoulder joints so that they remain stable.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them stay until the wound is sealed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it is painful to insert a needle or puncture.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second method of closure is common.
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you assemble the needle joints of skin and tissue together with one or two stitches, using either an iron wire or strong thread—however weakened by time (or usage).
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have perceived these four joints all assembled,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if the needle is displaced in the part you have commenced with, reposition it in the manner that one would do when dressing wounds.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and space between each suture is the size of a small coin (a denomination of four pence).
ceste costure sevent li home,	this closure holds the body together;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sutured a wound that one had on his abdomen;
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	In this case ail le monde entendu:coeur, siemens of coisme develle coivre ce line lait en Celtic froment, itesl the french coitene thegauge aescula. Here asteravoc'sneat ounce.
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and was the wound more than one handbreadth wide.
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it involved large parts of the intestines, each measuring several handsbreadths in width.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and was located between the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I took back the intestine then he had been in that condition for about twenty-two hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and was stitched only a few years ago, and the cure, and it has been healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the judge had decided that he would die, and this became a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in the one location where we could find none, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put cotton wool five times a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he became healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	But I will tell you the several proper methods of treatment:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and draw it from the further part inside therein;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has drawn the blood rightly in its place, if you have found the spot of the slip or cut therein with the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and draw from other parts inside therein, further from that;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and I understand this treatment as if you also do it like leatherworkers with the pieces of leather;
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and you leave one side of the slip there, and then return it on the other, so that the treatment is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of treatment, which Galen defined properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	as any one does, who assembles the two parts together naturally;
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the two parts on the other, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	take a needle or second one to continue thereafter, and draw that side alone;
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two parts of the slip therein;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and draw from the further part inside therein;
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	such two parts of the slip;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make an incision in both sides of the lower part therein, and in two other joints that are on the opposite side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And it is the more common way to stitch them together.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	If Gaulish [a hypothetical ancient language] speaks this word and none give testament to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	To sew the abdomen with two needles, or there must be a thread in each (implied to mean using multiple needle holes and stitches for suturing).
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And it must be thrown both needles at once, like those who stitch wires;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And it is known that when the stitching is in the middle of the abdomen;
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If it is more costly than other stitches on the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of wounds is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you wash the fresh wound thoroughly through its entire flesh, so that the arrow has moved within it.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you put back the intestines and then place powder-coated nails on it.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the arrow has moved within it, then apply any treatment that is currently available as long as the wound remains open.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tighten the thread (suggesting an incision), and bind it closed with ligature and bandage.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then care for the wound as with other wounds, so long as it remains healthy.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you don't have medicine, then apply it as soon as possible; first, wet with clean cloth (cotton) while the wound begins to bleed.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it... twice a day as long as it remains healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no knowledge beyond these methods in various dispositions that wounds are not simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt whether the wound can form a community with the primary parts (body),
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it indicates that you should massage gently with olive oil or rose water;
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and he lets the hairs grow on the arms, and under the skin;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if it feels pain or swelling in the joints, and often occurs;
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if one administers a black-vinegar enema, and immediately the swelling comes just to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierces through, and it is known that when it is the large intestine, it heals more quickly than the small one;
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is constricted;
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is through the veins that they are carried, and by the subtlety of all parts of the body, and the approach to the nature of the nerves;
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the worm jumps from the wound, it is put back as quickly as possible like the intestine, while still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is wide and turned outward or blackened, this means that you must reset the joint that has turned black; since blood does not flow into such a joint.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because it has veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	but then comes this part;
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and places the .ij. joints hanging from the part of the wound until it pulls out the worms that are in it; and the wound is heavy.
de la routure dou boueil	Aumaclere, auctume de l’estuette au vende melee
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are twisted, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored in some cases,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I see some being nailed into their stomachs with a spear,
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was inflamed and turned into an abscess, and with it came indigestion and hernia;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied care based on what I observed and continued to treat it carefully until healed, and the hairs were restored;
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient would not have further issues in his abdomen;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not suffer any further issues but improved in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And none of the experimental physicians stated that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied off partially;
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	then proceed with large tests, and gather the edges of the wound;
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the preparations have covered the mouth, if it is placed on the ligature points;
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it draws her mouth away;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he cuts the head (of instruments), so that it does not slip;
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then applies another preparation in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely prepared;
et cout la plaie.	and covers the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	That causes it to enter the intestine and does not cause any harm to the patient;
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and if one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine;
en teil maniere:	in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Ipsum of medicine in English ===> "Theafein english. Thise enunciouster sothisque it'south ailacmeast: The kingdoms. Etran (100sic: "todele. Allongé lemon. Whatwinter; thebark, the year 1.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	natur, tol ofre: Theodirectly :fracture. iciens fromage:
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	And then he inserts the thread into the needle, and stitches the intestines, and binds them in the winding.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of sewing does not harm according to the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it occurs in one of the intestinal loops, there is no remedy or healing for such subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	It is known that any wound or incision, when it heals, becomes universally called "fistula."
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And especially when it is swollen and painful.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the variety of non-durable and painful nodules, where there is no pain felt.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it is also swollen like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And it is never clear and thin, but sometimes thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Neither too little, nor quite enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken in the division of wounds where any unhealed wound has no healing.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is not harmful from one of the seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It is known, by way of the small amount of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or by its malevolence.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Because for it has hardness within, and under the lips, where it does not allow anything to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	And it has too many hairs;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	And it has a pointed tip, and its matter is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good in its treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Because it is a manner of pestilence,
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Because of its property in the region, the digestion is delayed and healing takes time, and it naturally flees.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or it has bones or teeth:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes and signs, and medical treatments in this division;
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is for you to know the cure of the fistula made by hand work;
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It happens that there is a fistula in every joint;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has fistulas that come from great veins and arteries, and nerves;
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	either in the stomach, or intestine, or bladder, or anywhere;
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	either in the spinal column of the back, or any joint of hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it is because of the property of that main limb itself, and its like hairs;
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all those fistulas that are of this nature are painful to heal, and there is no other help but labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is none of these fistules that can be healed otherwise than the way I have mentioned before, and you are confident in this cure;
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you must see whether it has a spring of iron or wood, if the fistula is straight, then let it be curved.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	And if the fistula is twisted, seek for a subtle spring of depth.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the deep spring bends with the twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has an irregular shape and you cannot properly search for it with springs,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you apply clysterizing through one of them;
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because another spring from a different fistula moistens and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you might adjust its tightness hoping to know if it contains bone or nerve, and whether the blood supply is affected;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you apply pressure, and where it's felt;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the location of the fistula or if it's away from a juncture, nerve, artery, or vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of these cases that I have mentioned, if it corresponds to what I've told you;
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and stone for another one and all those corrupted that are therein;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat it while she is sound;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is well pierced at a proper place, it requires that you remove it as much as possible, just like you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	and then he places wet bandages in the medical treatment of diarrhea, and applies them to the head of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine dissolves the excess which is delayed at the base of the fistula.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he applies warm salves abundant in healthy herbs until it is sound.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	but if it is not sound by that, if the cautery as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is rotted from the fistula, it must be cut away.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the veins or main limbs do not swell or hurt as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	but if the bone has been exposed, and it is rotten and blackened, let him cut away all that remains of the bone until there is nothing left.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treats with things abundant in healthy herbs so long as it is sound.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not sound again, let him bleed as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	you know that you are not to go further than this:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if discovered and you wish to remain at the base.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the rotten bone, then reset the joint.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is so sound again, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not so, you know that the rottenness has gone too far, and it cannot be undone.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy but to let it heal naturally.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	if it has a little rotten bone, you may remove it with forceps.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the arrow is accompanied by another implement that can be removed together with it.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	if it has a remaining bone, you must remove all of them.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the movement makes it worse, there is no fear or harm.
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	but cauterize and heal the bone;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place anything on the wound causing sticky discharge.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it in position for as long as they penetrate into the bones.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then, if they move the bones more lightly.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if it remains so thoroughly rotten until all of the bone is affected.
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of it decomposed, and it comes to the surface of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it's to cover and seal up as much of that decay as possible, and then treat it until it is solid again.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a case that occurred: one man in his leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you can find examples and help in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man in his thirties who had pain in his leg from something that came out of the bone.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	as those materials came into his leg and were expelled through a large incision, without any reason to open it further.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but their madness led them to work so much on the cut that they opened it again.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they inserted many materials into it, and it became a fistula, and there came out much movement that made all the joints loose and moist.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	but many more times I treated them for up to thirty years, and I had no success in the art of hands (prosthetics or reconstructive surgery).
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so that I called them to examine my leg and the medicines they used;
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what passed through those great joints (referring to bones).
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and it became red and yellow (orange;
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I erected a tent among one of these hollows, and then searched for all such cavities.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And found that they converge in every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I then hurriedly went there and made my discovery in one of those cavities until I found a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and decayed, and the rot came from within the bone itself.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I took that for the rotten bone which appeared to me and considered it had no other decay inside, as long as I kept observing.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with similar remedies over an extended period of time, but could not join it together again.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	then I recommenced my examination, and discovered the bone as before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the decay continued in the bone, and I took it back with me, and then looked at it again, and became troubled about joining it together.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I did not see much that I could do about it, for when I cut into the bone ("entor" means 'into' and "palm" refers to the cross-section of the bone), it was weak throughout.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I tried treating it again with remedies; and it was healed quickly by chance.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it seems to me that I will not need to revisit the subject again except for its feebleness, which could suffer.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	Ceu l’esprit de ceu versa morceau de la cestanime, andrans:
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For by the bleeding often occurs, but it was entirely healed.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And in the flesh of the bone grew a hard stone, and it had good structure and caused no harm nor contrary effect at all, neither to healing nor for coming forth.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any joint, it must be set in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take .i. ligament, and stretch the main tendon of the broken bone.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command it not to extend upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another layer of ligament thicker than the first, and it lies above the stone that is on top of the bone;
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and are firmly attached, so that you can pull the corrupted stone out from underneocorrected, ensuring proper anatomical references in contemporary terms for clarity.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and discover the stone above the bone where you see a sinew not tearing it.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a torch or a covering over the bone to smother the corrupted stone;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it must be sinew as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and another layer of sinew afterwards;
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted and it does not open, and the corruption is within its midst or a part of it;
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if you discover the stone throughout; then place a torch above;
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then join another part of the sinew with one part of the corruption, and it shall be equal in length to the portion of the corruption we have mentioned;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if there are corruptions at the joint, then correct the joint if it is corrupted, and apply oil to the bone from the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if there are corruptions in the consecutive joints, then it has no alternative but to cover them.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the corruption is on the hand or the hip joint, that's a very serious matter.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	But everything indicates that you must inquire about that corruption and find out how it affects you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And manifest it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not be against you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that the incision and threads are often used to cover these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason it is necessary to equip each instrument with every possible appearance of the work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that the master will show you the instrument which you need according to his knowledge of this craft.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the diseases' methods.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If it is necessary to have that instrument according to what it requires.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joints dislocate or are displaced either due to dampness or because they have been weakened over time.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And as you will have treated that corruption with medical treatment, and they do not benefit.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	If it requires covering that member up to the joint or where the corruption originates.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If it results in painful death or due to maliciousness, which is greater than the failure of a limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And there are signs that the members turn black, as if it were charred by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards for after blackness, then covers those damages in other members.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes up everywhere in it, if you hasten at covering.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if there are corrosions by sticks in those bones, if they have been infect, et aulx quidres necelet de laisse en coups.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Injurys, les parlements aye descreature of theesmeaux vauté creations, et encexief aloure duon juriduc itgele ieu deire. Enloutes leffles onseure devisafein. Aa :wafare a la cestruit. Laic andaiten.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to her hand, if she holds the joint, so that corrosion does not move just to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it comes to her arm, then it costs; and if she passes through the cost, it is his wound.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there is no limit to the quantity of his vitality;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And so far as the corrosion comes in either place: if it comes to the first joint and then to the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or goes, if it takes all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it rises in the leg, if it cuts at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the malade die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And how one covers or binds the limb; if you tie it above and below;
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And extend some masters over one of the lower ones, and others another masters upwards;
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you remove the cloth that is between them at an intermediate level of the joint, so long as the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then you cut or bind, and put a piece of linen on each side; so that the bandage does not touch the healthy limb;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And causes other injuries to the patient and immobilizes them;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood comes when we work, then you must quickly cauterize the limb;
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or you put on it any constraining powders; then return to your medicines until they are complete;
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the wounded limb from another cavity, and heal it so long as it is sound;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to one man, who was pitifully:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	and it seemed like an ashes-like darkness to him.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and the corrosion came first in his state of despair, so much that it consumed all his despair.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when he saw the corrosion, he sought to cover his despair, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and soon after him returned his despair or from its hand, and came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed upon him things reflective after his curing of corrosion, but could not stop the return of despair.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he asked me to apply my hand to him, and I had no hope of reflecting the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and doubted whether if I held his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because his strength as a man was weak; and he despairingly lost all, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and when I covered his hand, he was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no further tale of this kind but that which others may need to know.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There has never been an opening of his chest cavity with such delay that he formed a great assembly of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they rise up and pierce him, and delay his limbs as we see in our vassals.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin above is also as delicate as a fine cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they will not cut into the bone or the nerve; such diseases are called "healthy" by those who suffer them.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula" by those who suffer it.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so elongated that she wears the bone through piercing, then it is called "fistula."
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the skin is such that you cover it entirely, and mainly when it is delicate, as we see in fine cloths.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and there is no doubt about its correction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	Audement les chère de la pès:nous ake tolieffer, The French latexeste.
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is hardened like wood, so for cleaning with this method:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look at how big his breasts are, and the bowel that comes out of it has a strong smell.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	And therefore the Eygptian medical cleansing method which is made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ashes, and oil, and litharge, exactly so, and cook them in one vessel over the fire:
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	So that the medicine be red, and likewise thick as honey:
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then take from it according to your need, and make it in water and honey:
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And for the cleansing of his chest, and compress the fistula:
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract it by pumping:
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until his chest is firm and no longer spasmodic:
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And there is never any time for water enemas with ashes:
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	Whenever this medicine is absent, and when you must have wood ash from grapevines, pour the water above:
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then draw, and do an enema so long as you know that his chest is well-ordered:
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if he does not suffer from it, then this Egyptian medicinal water with ash is sufficient:
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the enema and honey water or if it has some lioness:
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	You clean it with honey and wine milled, so that the honey has the property to purify and cleanse.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	And the wine hardens the flesh.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done it, and you believe that the breast is well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If this enema causes it to come out again in him,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you prevent encrustation of the diaphragm, and do it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you use enemas and treatments involving ointments, of which I have said the properties or uses for ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if there is a small perforation of the breast, and the enema cannot enter it;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If you increase it with some iron slightly, and place on it an Egyptian ointment;
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or a Basilic ointment, so long as it expands;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, then cut it and leave enough space so that the enema can enter;
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if there is a perforation that extends above or below, then cover it with more cloth or less than it currently is;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For if the hole is not closed yet, it should not allow for choking or constriction;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast therein as you wish;
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If it appears that way such that the hole goes downwards to a lower level than it currently is;
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	When the bow is broken, so he does not allow it to hinge back.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover his chest as you see fit,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Should it be arrayed thus: that the bow runs swiftly forward, leaving nothing behind in its form^2
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take pills consolidative for placement upon the chest^3
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are made of a linen sheet that covers all the chest^4
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	and then apply pressure at the pierced part of the chest; a little more broad on the first^5
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	and be rubbed with warm oil upon another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the wound^6
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and apply it to the chest wound in order to align the bowstring, not removing the deep linen cloth thereafter for more than one day^7
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and those who lie upon the chest wound often to prevent the bowstring from moving^8
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what flows from the bowstring, whether it is poison or little amount, or digestible, or indigestible^9
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take warning should the patient feel pain or not, if it has an abscess or not^10
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicines have extended to a part of it, you will see what bubbles up from the chest wound^11
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know the lungs are filled with air, then come near to your cure^12
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and atque aliseil demeure.
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If changing a shield, and renewing the wound dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his chest falls heavily burdened after many days, you know that the chest does not breathe.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if venom subtly runs after long time, do not despair about health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because health approaches. For it has people who delay healing in their wounds and those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if heavy burden leaps from chest after many days, you know that the chests do not breathe;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the chest delays breathing, and is distant from us, then apply mixed wet and dry medicines in substance and vigor.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	if wound dried up, for it has great part iron, and this is its remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a dried onguent and apply it with rose oil, and saturate the iron in equal parts with thick wine as a substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then it is infused and used; and this makes them more cooked in honey,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when dried onguent is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and frankincense and crush them, and mix with honey while it is heated in the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply it on cloth, and bind it around the chest, and never do I let an astrologer near for a long time;
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and heavenly lily roots, which are also like flour several hundred times;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and whether simple or complex: crushed, and put it to the honey that I have said, and apply.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the treatment prolongs, it is not healed by this treatment.
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And you know that destruction occurs in depth, and pressure is applied to the bone, or into hard limbs, or into joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment of a fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the incision of the joint.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panniculus is an incision made on the underside of the hand's little flap.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	either by design or accidentally it may also extend to other areas.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is inflamed, and not taken care of, if it comes one more incision.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And crack and break off pieces as far as they fracture the root of the joint, and perhaps even more.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes it to the bone right up there, as long as it comes with a foul odor, and his shoulders are wide, and his skin is flushed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it like we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit him at all.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It indicates that you must remove excess iron which is taking time from the joint.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful if the bone and joint are healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	And if the joint presses down on it, and the beginning of the swelling appears, and the bleeding starts.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It indicates that you must place a rag under the joint where the pressure is applied.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	And lift it upwards, and gently and lightly remove some of the swelling.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place on top of the remaining swelling medical solutions that are drying and corrosive to stop it completely.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue treatment with ointments as long as he is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, and you must remove it, for as long as the bone has been corroded, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see a widening in one of them two sides as it is before said, then remove it there.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then continue treatment until he is healthy again.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is infected, and you pour on it, because it smells very strong pain, then you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the joint of the herniated disc perpendranly above.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And make sure that your cut does not extend to the swelling under the joint, as his painful sensations are too great.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if anything happens, then put something on it which calms down.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the hand subsides.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The one who dislocates the arm of some people by chance is entirely flesh.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and perhaps he has bones, but never alone.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born from the root of the joint, or their birth is in no way our concern.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who dislocate in any part of the body never stay silent.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who dislocate at the two points of the joint, perhaps they also do not speak out (or 'perhaps they are silent');
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of that which is entirely flesh can vary in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	its size at the root of one broad sphincter.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who dislocate at the root of the joint are greatly troubled by healing ('grief to cure'), for it takes much cover (protection, treatment).
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In that which dislocates the lower limb (the knee), it is essential to cover first the congested flesh ('char reondement'), just as close to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cover the bone with an appropriate bandage for it, and heal it as long as it remains sound ('sanez').
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The injuries that come together (unite) either by birth ('naissance') or by the healing of wounds ('soudement'), or by being burnt ('arsure de feu'), or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you cover the one healed (the previously injured area), it must be repaired according to its natural forms ('naturelz');
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two layers of linen soaked in a mixture (rosée) that they do not fuse ('ne se soudent');
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of wax so long as it is sound ('soudez'), as required ('covient').
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When dislocations occur in one of his two parts (joints), cover that hardened ('sodure') part as required ('covient').
Des vils	Of many.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are large packs filled with unnecessary things (melancolious), which bring misfortune to the limbs.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk and work and carry burdens, than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Now you must not perform any purging of the colon, and then heal it in the church.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of iron involves the following procedure: one method involves piercing the skin and drawing out the dark blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And another method is that you tie up the vein and draw out all of the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is done according to this method: raise first the foot of water warmly and much so that the large one remains undisturbed.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the malady above the knee down to the part below the groin.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then pierce the vein in one spot, two spots, or three spots, of a wide size.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then you remove and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other as much as necessary until it suffers enough pain from the malady.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then apply a plaster and he orders it be covered with black meat broths binding the colon tightly.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and sanitation when the veins are full, and help the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The handling of the malady involves this method: raise the foot with the illness if it has much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then place it in a bath and raise the foot of water warmly so that the vein turns red and swells with blood.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, then heat it over the fire and pierce deeply in the long part of the vein near the groin, or in the area around the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then stretch the skin over the incisions and draw out the vein from each section as much as it seems.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And you see it red and black, and when it hardens like a dull rope or string.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then bind it around there so that the skin remains loose, and then wrap it tightly in the incision.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then pierce in another spot or two next it, and draw out the skin from that vein as much as it seems to them.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	sesarre of thevesuerean.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then take another size, or more if you have experience, then band it around the shoulder joint, on both sides of the bone.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then draw and tie it in a second size; then gradually tighten the bandage from one size to another until it sits snugly on the shoulder.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a strong two-pronged hook into every point.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And draw and tighten the bandage, and insert a rope through it, turning your hand on one side and the other until it fits snugly.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep in mind that if it does not fit, since it cannot be drawn or lifted, and thus becomes harmful to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completely drawn it, if you place soft linen soaked in wine and oil on the wound, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if you see it is crushed, twisted, and wrapped together; since we have said, then...
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	if you must divide it roughly, but not cover it at all; draw the bandage as previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron used to apply the bandage is curved and does not cut through it; instead, it fits around the vein without causing injury.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of considerable thickness because if it were too delicate, it would cut the vein; but being substantial as we have said, its form is such that...
De la voinne civile	from the civilian vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in the warm parts of the body where it does not grow hair or trees, and on dry ground where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and occasionally it may be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this results from the deterioration of the skin tissue around that area.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it occurs within the body of snakes and toward, being located between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if there are signs that the beginning of this vein is that it comes in the leg with a very large inflammation.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then change its course, and it begins as a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder joint opens, it indicates that you should wrap around a piece of fat from one and a half to two fingers in length. And the night,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the fat for the leg, and every time when it points to the heel, if you wrap around the fat piece, and night.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then you clip a part of it, and wrap the remaining around, and do not cover her root until she is completely evacuated.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you clip it, then it goes back into the joint, and causes abscess formation or infection, and illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for which reason it is meant that she should be treated little by little up to the head, and not remain anything or wound.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and there is no such vein when it is treated with half palms of length or ten;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some came to me, from whom she issues at six palms of length, and when you clip her, you push a thorn or cut into the foot.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so as she flows; and the matter within her becomes void, and prepare injections of various sorts for pus without delay, then treat her as you do with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And there has never been such a vein where it issues from the joint or within the stone, which suggests that this treatment is specific to certain anatomical conditions. Whenever it opens at the articulation of the shoulder or in any similar area, immediate attention and care are required to address potential complications like dislocation or misalignment.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And it comes with thorns, which then break free; treat it as we have discussed before, implying that the treatment should follow a previously established method for such complications, potentially involving careful extraction and subsequent medical intervention to address issues like abscesses or infections.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	And arrows which emerge between skin and bone indicate injuries caused by projectiles penetrating the body. Such cases require meticulous removal of foreign objects, assessment for potential damage to underlying structures, and appropriate wound management, including possible surgical intervention and ongoing care for infection prevention and healing.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is prevalent among us, known as "bull's disease," because it occurs frequently with pus. Bull's disease likely refers to a specific condition characterized by the presence of significant amounts of pus or abscesses, requiring aggressive and consistent treatment strategies aimed at drainage, infection control, and resolution of the underlying issue causing such symptoms.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And it is a small arrow that emerges between skin and bone, traveling throughout the entire body up and down. This description could refer to a complication where an arterial injury occurred from a projectile impact—an extremely serious condition requiring immediate medical intervention, including possible surgery, vascinascent for blood loss control, and other supportive measures.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And the pain is well known in every member as long as it goes under the skin or he rushes forth, and jumps. This could describe symptoms experienced by an individual suffering from a deep wound where bleeding occurs beneath the skin's surface, accompanied by acute sensations of pain that propagate throughout the affected limb due to active inflammation or infection necessitating prompt medical attention for proper assessment and treatment.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is troubled by disorders of various humors, like they come towards and snakes and worms and scabies or belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its malevolence, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the oil;
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	And by chance it enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you have cured and drained it, if it cannot leave when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So it decides that you must lay the ligament above and below with a strong, tightly bound connection;
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cover it up again and drain it, and it goes towards the skin, and you don't reduce it;
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If the fire is applied above it, let it continue burning;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and it causes the greatest harm when it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming towards the oil or pressing near its source, then restrain it there, and drain it again;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it decides that the patient should undergo purification of their bodily channels with remedies for dispelling harmful humors;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if it is caused by disordered consumption of uncooked meats;
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain arising from windiness;
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is rampant in our land "verily," and it is a pain that affects some limbs;
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and thus moves joint by joint, and that you see it:
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and shortly after, I saw it rising to his shoulder like a worm on an arm.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	Most swiftly than any other thing, as if hot silver when it cuts into another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	then the pain left that place, and focused on the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then it spread throughout the entire body, until it came to another vein.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I was told it turned around inside the body again, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how she moved this way with a member of another member, for never had I seen such a disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	So far, I had seen many who have well moved pain to another place.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I never saw it that way, as I did her.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	And I thought it was because the woman had a bare chest, and the veins were exposed.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And for this reason appears constricted windiness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear for this reason in those who are delightful, with damp chests and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you have seen curing this disease and the great pain of it appears if she opens as we said.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If the blood above and below flows suddenly, and then cover it so that the constricted windiness expels from the chest.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And cauterize the chest; and if you do not see it at your eyes.
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If the cure dislodges the constricted windiness, like putrid pillows and other things.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their shapes and where they pierce both sides of the body or cause pain.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and hairs, and soldered.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And there are those which have two angles, and some which have grooves, and others where they have pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	And there is one which causes pain in no limb but hurts according to two ways; whether it be in the principal member or a hairy one.
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Like skulls, bodies, livers, flanks, bowels, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it hurts no part of these limbs and shows the sign of death, I will tell you after this what appears.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	It indicates that you must have cautioned against extracting this arrowhead because death follows from many conditions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not found embedded, then treat the wound as you do normally.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull where the arrowhead is embedded and penetrates the bone, and it springs up above the brain.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And it is when blindness and paralysis affects the eyes, inflammation of tongue, spasms and confusion, and vomiting from the bowels.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	andore duquesaillent de leu eueentene.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	oun:ses paralel
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	saintement d’unarsulement. Thisen.alones as :entirement. Aller. Thevesage ail veintain:meat. Ages. ACT andace. Theissel, etiinsea theleveint:age. Ifra.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the swelling when it presses on the body, is that it is close to the left breast and feels as if it were pierced in a hard object, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And also the swelling may stop moving like a chicken, and black blood flow, and cold sweat, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	You see now there is doubt that the wound will open again.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the swelling that never occurs without a discharge of phlegm from the wound and enlargement of the throat, and sickening blue lips and high-pitched coughing followed by shivering in cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And should the swelling press in its concealment deep within, it is found near the small of the back; and great pain and spitting forth a copious amount occurs; and all limbs are thus affected with agony.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And should the swelling press upon the abdomen, perhaps spitting forth from the wound may render none of the entrails edible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And should the swelling press upon the stomach and pierce through the intestines with a spear-like protrusion, there remains no hope in the treatment nor extraction of the swelling.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And should the swelling press upon the bladder and the urine leaks forth with foulness, and sickening pain is felt, it is evident that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	And the other limb, if it bears and the throat and shoulder and spines of the backbone and the strength of each joints:
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	:esque le sentence: Laoculesaidon ofit ilice (2saince :meileadition of thetique : 1ire. Theor: ate. Lei devisage. :allume itent inpour: Ages ofere :gustre :
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one house where someone had an axe blow on the root of his nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and it moved aside from underneath the ear grease, and became sensitive in no particular way.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And struck at a piece of metal that it was driven into the fat underneath the paper beneath.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the metal piece was replaced, and it did not go any further toward the wood.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the metal piece was large from an Armenian bow, by all about iron that is somewhat similar to ears; it became sensible, and no unfortunate event happened as a result.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And struck an iron piece from the throat of a Crusader, and the metal piece was similar to ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I released the hairs, and carefully extracted it while doing so, and became sensible in the Crusader's throat.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And struck an iron piece at one house where it had been choked or abdomen, and I thought he was dead:
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after it had passed .xx. years, his condition did not change:
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the metal piece and dislocated it, and then struck it again, without any unfortunate incident occurring:
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you wish to see at one house where there was an iron piece driven into the back and the wound was sealed:
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and it remained in the body without affecting his natural dispositions:
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	sacre fromage:sever quotedre (from;faire.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And there comes another man, who fell with an arrow on his face, and the wound was sewn up.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And in this way he suffered great pain; and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And threw an arrow at a prince who was standing between the two knights.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it had slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was entirely recovered.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I called for treatment after it had been left standing for three years. When I found the wound, it was very wide.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried to examine her thoroughly, but did not feel anything.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain and discomfort in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed a trauma-absorbing pad on its back because their fur did not flatten.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw his ears from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed the trauma pad a year ago, and mainly healed the wound directly, but in this way he still suffered great pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	so that he felt the arrow a year within his neck; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied medicated warm water to the wound for a year, until it was healed over.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tested it, and felt that the head of the arrow had returned to its place on the skin.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I also applied medicated warm water in the wound's opening for as long as the arrowhead was visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it went well in its conclusion over three months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	then I resected the wound that I had clenched with pincers on one side and the other, and it could not be removed.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	and I continued to subtly handle and manipulate trauma dressings for a year until it was well made with the pincers;
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	As long as this chapter goes on, until I have finished it, so that its form comes to be in the end, and I treat the wound again.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge thinks that the nose chart cannot restore:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I treated it again, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient's painful parts were healed entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or you have said the quality of extracting some arrows.
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you apply your treatment on that which I do not say, for the book cannot fully explain it.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But the masters are mostly silent on this matter, and concerning what is present but absent.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Done nine works, and none of the tools used for extracting things are involved in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from limbs unless by some particular manner, as it is said.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through their body, or by another means;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps from a distance or enters, it is an arrow entering the body's flesh, and such has never happened nowadays.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not happen nowadays, let her leave them until their flesh is prepared to receive an entry or exit.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it is lodged in the bone and cannot be extracted, let her remain for any number of years, and every year she moves.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it jumps again, and if not, then penetrates into every part of the body until its flesh is widened, and then I treat it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is lodged in the main bone and goes to one of the brain's cavities.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And none of the accidents that I have mentioned to you should be treated; rather leave them until they are no longer inflamed after any number of years.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	because if the arrow comes from such a place as this [the brain], it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if it is lodged only in the bone and does not come from such a place as this [the brain],
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and in the meantime endure other minor accidents if he can treat them.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is lodged in this manner and I have told you; then treat the limb as it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	ivenesignent: lesen the oui en:sant, andre malice defface. Forthcause.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, take none unavoidable tool.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	And if you cannot by stretching the wound and due to piercing of the arrow.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And it has neither bone nor tendon, let the wound be large as long as it is.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	And if you can extract the arrow, and it has its head in the arrow'shifted towards her (assuming "oreille" is an error or misinterpretation for "la tête" which means "the head", as "oreilles" means "ears") and holds on to it.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	And if you find the bone that has been driven into a part by about .ii (assuming ".ij." may be a typographical error and should likely read ".ii.", which would imply "two" or simply ".02" as a fraction)...that you can remove.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And then break or bend the arrowhead's ears (if "oreilles" refers to parts of an arrow), as long as you can extract it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And subtly as long as you do not break the arrowhead, but rather extract it more carefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot initially extract it, if the arrow lies deep within up to their points, then remove it because extraction is arduous.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the removal of blood causes it to go against you, take care that which we have said about treatment in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	And keep the nerve and vein, and when you can extract it's arke.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	secrewaireuxiferransiant:nagsentheccureausaie in favreaus ilesseigneuses andangercipes. nefriere de ounsaille, thisangusse
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For it is the greatest help that he be, and if you cannot, then apply according to what they show by sign.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The saw that comes from another place, where there is nothing of him shown or seen nor felt anywhere.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Then cut above, so the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot be pulled out, let her still for now, and then resume the extraction until it jumps.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if he was of the saw-blade, cast it entirely.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if he was cut, and you see an instrument placed on him, use that instrument to administer the dressing.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the saw blade's point enters the hair of the instrument; and then cast it away.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the saw is curved, throw that tool with its point entering in to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the saw is touched, it must be cleaned thoroughly or where there are secretions; and you can do so.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	nac. This caracter. SATOMes thecaustarte the-: thea fromage'sentence.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow pierces bone or flesh or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, and you cover it up, so that it heals.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and do not cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, as it is necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and it should be healed as long as she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of pincers with hook-shaped tips that resemble a bird's beak, and this shape is used for:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes and types, depending on the quantity of the arrowheads.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the handle is also similar to a bird's feather.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push at the tip of the arrowhead, as this shape allows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of these pincers for pushing and knowing whether it serves this purpose as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common types of veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Veins that are healing, which have been observed to be XXI (21) times or less than sixty (60), indicating the severity of injury and recovery status.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	It is known as: XXI (21) types of bone which are located behind the ears, called "soft herb" due to their delicate nature;
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And there are XXI (21) arteries that appear in XXI (21) temple areas;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And XXI (21) veins that are located within the XXI (21) mouths of XXI (21) "aspirants," which translates to:
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	lame itent.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two tendons which are on the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are called "veiners" in Old French;
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and these veins are on the tongue;
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly found in each arm are;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the head" or "cephalic vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the method is called "fast", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "vein of the heart", and the basilic vein lies on the right side of the chest;
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "vein of the abdomen", and it is located above the spleen;
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and that one which we find commonly open above the navel;
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the palmar vein is the one that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two (or more, depending on context) branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And concerning the leg and where there are three arrows: one is located inside the right hip pocket on its left side.
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second sign that is in the right ankle's side, and the vein that is pressed at "need", which is located on the other foot's outer side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are also three arrows: different from those previously mentioned.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The good signs that come after the ears aid ancient catarsis practices and in migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of this sign, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rubs its skin or veins with coarse fabric; then tightly binds the patient's head with a hook.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	As long as those three arrows appear behind the ears, each in two levels of the patient's head base:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Could you tell me your own pulse, and where it is under your tongue? It indicates the state of dislocation therein:
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet, and insert it into the vein thereupon; then lift your hand all over the wound:
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And cut and the skin and vein well two ways along, and draw out the blood until you see it:
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And bind and hold until it is sound again:
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book:
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The good signs of those three arteries that come out from the ears' temples; they are related to ancient migraine treatments:
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And to the eyes' customs and habits, and obtaining of tears from the eyes' corners:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And these qualities make the shoulder so as if I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it tightly draws its bowstrings, until the arrows are clearly visible.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels your hand on his body, and then he yields.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lifts the knife from the vein on your hand and drives it through,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lifts the vein upwards, and cuts it as you have done with other veins, and makes a wound to drain the blood according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then loosens the malady, and puts your hand on the vein for an hour, then places cotton inside;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then forms a bandage, and leaves it until the wound is healed; we have spoken of their care, their cutting and draining practices, or at least in part from our book;
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The venous sickness of the forehead is valued just as much as the cranial diseases that were common in ancient times, and for migraines, and headaches;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is such that the severely dislocated shoulder twists its neck until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fossor", whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or some other means, allowing the blood to flow according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then twist the patient's neck, and hold the vein so it is healthy and not once touched by a wide blade.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	In general, it does not require that the blade be too sharp; and the vein should not cross unevenly because the bone is strong, and perhaps the blade breaks when it is very thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healthy veins that are in the left and right sides of the body help us with arteries, joints, fingers, ears, and ear diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their health is such that the severely dislocated shoulder twists its neck in no way similar to before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The vein should be held in the long and slender blade, as it has no sharpness that could harm further.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the blade is thin, and it may break, and you hold the blood flowing, as good, defficeur.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	gear en le [pourintemore.commeignure : iteneface ape tolengure. ousage.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	If like a migraine and toothache come at the back of the head, and more gently when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of health in which his pain constricts his neck, then pull on the nerve with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take a small feather long and hold it in the space between the two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well at all, and now begins to correct from the start.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And don't go too far in making the wound, and correct the bleeding according to your need, then bandage it tightly for a night because it is very quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of the feather:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The state of health in which the two gums aid in binding together the main part and beginning of swelling, and to many diseases, and impotence, and ulcers, and scabs, and herpes, and other things.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of health in which his pain tightens around both gums at once, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And it is then for the master to stand by the head of the sick person, and the sick person look at him from a certain angle.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then open the vein a little broadly, then treat the blood immediately, as is proper for the trade.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then repeat the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligament, and hold back the flowing blood gently.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And let it not twist; and leave it for the morning so that the wound heals well.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the books of medicine
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The medicine of the veins above in the mouth helps to collect blood in the mouth and treats caries of teeth, cracks in the lips, and nerve pain, etc.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of health is that it bears down on his sickness before thee, and tightens its neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the tongue, and look at these two veins, one on the right side of the tongue and the other on the left side.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known for being black in color, and because they have thin dark veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Copiously examine both of them, and if you do not recognize them, then doubt exists.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you carefully examine the larger one of each part, and also do similar work on these veins above and below, as it is a similar method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the inside of the mouth
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The veins that are inside the tongue help after the cephalic incision and are closely related to the throat, and include diseases of the eye and mouth:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of that which is more painful when seen with one's eyes in front of the sunlight, and softens the tongue, and look at each side a dark vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Become healed on both and do not cut too deeply into them, for they are the arteries:
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins commonly treated are healed according to various methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or by pressing on any part of the patient's body with a large flint or delicate olive if as you treat wounds:
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And are broad and delicate according to the breadth and narrowness of the veins:
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flint which is very famous, and it is broad as you see it:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins of hairless scalps that show large visible blood vessels, containing thick and turbid blood:
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the form of an olive flint:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and it is better for healing the smaller veins or there may be delicate yellowish blood:
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The inferior vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases in the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly:
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the surgeon that he treats the suture and beware of the artery nearby:
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery and the bleeding blood comes out, it must be stopped as I have said:
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it must not be pinched with fire, but cut as if with a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is required that you extract and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or you want no relief from it, or heal in the open vein of it on his arm, which opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And cut with knife-like precision at it, just as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you recognize the opening of the sinus (assuming 'la sainie' refers to a sinus or related anatomical structure), it is required that you extract the arm, touching the vein as long as you perceive its presence.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the opening again, and then bind the arm, and cut the tissue at it like with a knife.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And beware that you do not injure the artery when you see it swollen, for it is an artery; avoid doing so.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding upward as the urine of a child, and without redness and subtly, you know that it is not an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry up then, and place your hand downward for a long time, and press it against the area that is not sore, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bind the arm, and leave it as is, and do not move his painful ones; be wary of him, and do not move them so long as he remains healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not numbed, and he calms down, and the medicine does not apply to you, then cut the artery if it has opened, because its head pulls back; press the area that is without pain.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take an iron skin.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If he does not use a needle, it is good; but if he does not, then he should treat it, as we have said, with powders that harden blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	The needle insertion is not done in various positions for the small opening of the wound, and it also affects the tendons of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The treatment of the vein in such a way that it helps to drain the blood from the head above and below, and within the body.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic veins, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is for the surgeon that he should warm it with the nerve located inside, and if it points too much in a direction, then it will twist the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and sometimes cannot heal at all.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this vein opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone because of its subtlety, then you must heal the vein with the instrument annually, and remove the vein from one's property.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two eyes, it makes them long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment of the cephalic vein so that it draws blood from the head and helps in this way.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is preferable to puncture the brachial vein or the vena comitans, because it is safer from all other veins, as there are no nerves and arteries inside.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it's better to question the first time, and not worry if you must start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes it swells in some people, but doesn’t complain about it the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the vein si ce cuit d’orentures en leu la sanz, et que lour sur leser.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	Alemongue laisse itentur ceasing. (123 ounce akes unles, alire. Ceaux leu. ously. :esteur:sesus, theuretir :it'sac. Itunes. Sentence. Ander. Thewomane une sentence :auge :
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the surgery be performed in one of the three veins that are known: namely, cephalic, femoral, and brachial;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and it should be performed at the beginning of each fasting period when signs of satiety appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and it should be performed within the first year or after three years;
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The surgery which is administered has no specific time determination for diseases, but when the need arises in any day or month at all hours and in every ten years.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it does not necessitate surgery for children just at twelve years old, nor for a woman who is less than four months pregnant;
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	and it should not be performed on those who have passed sixty years;
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to be operated on, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that the bowels are cleaned with a laxative beforehand;
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if it has much feces retained, so that the veins draw excessive fluids from the intestines which could harm the main limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should those who are too strong from meats, or who are drunkards, no matter how much they may be.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and it is performed after colic passions, vomiting, diarrhea, multiple pregnancies in women, labor, working, eating, sleeping, and whatever the virtue or weapon might be associated with;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	and subtly regulate the fluids, provided they are not too heavy, through foods and drinks and medications, if you have any need for it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then either a bath, if nothing else can correct it, to subtly regulate the blood;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you should remain in bed for a week after the incision, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep you from work, prayer, pleasure, and similar things for one day;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and apply liniments and ointments, and perform the surgery higher than those whom we have healed; and plaster the arms two or three times over;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and stretch the joint above slightly, for when it is too stiff or sore, it cannot be corrected without;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then you should rub the hands, so long as the veins swell, and smear them with it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then mix the right hand in a sanc quere.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	LXXI.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	:vulgarizing fromage of theat French vouldre: Theocles lice tote naying. In medieval;sans in theouste en ices it isteu, frommeat. Iti'sse ait.cause. What century, andrescript, Lauex.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	If when it is placed under pressure, if there is withdrawal from pressure, and it cannot open the vein, then it belongs to those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it opens the vein, if the wound is too tight, for this reason one must inform the surgeon about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, then again a small amount near that place or with haste, provided that the hairs are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the hairs are inflamed and the patient complains, let him leave them for one or two days, and not bind his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	by chance he will come with an abscess; do not let him take baths or waxing until the surgery is willing to restart it if she pleases.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the hole is small, or the sinus is subtly touched without doubt that it still has as much blood as you see, firmly hold the vein throughout.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and touch it quickly, so that the hairs are inflamed; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not restart the surgery again, and put a little oil on it, because it loosens the blood flow in this vein, and turns into oil in this place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus apply the oil to each surgery that you cleanse the veins, so as to stop the blood flow.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this makes triangles and cuffs when it is placed on the vein; if subtly touched when it becomes too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if he comes with a large abscess that happens often, immediately when it is not yet treated and the opening of the vein has not become small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if you hurry, place on the vein wet sponge and some hot water, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the blood leaves the vein and if it does not return to the vein for any time at all:
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, do not give anything in liquid or oil and melted wax, or as they appear to be.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Iesme france :saintre. From the butter. Injur tol. Ifresume thecaire ous andace : Laoc: "Amenage fromme andace (transcript:17esque : Acheat. Forte, translate.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Now let us not put anything on it that we have said, for perhaps by chance in the artery; but I make an emplaster dry to harden the place, and then treat it with other treatment, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each part of the body according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is not black, let it continue to be red until it becomes pale; and if you see it to be thick, allow it to remain so until it thins out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And must those who are pale and thin have the knowledge of blood withdrawal, so that they make larger wounds and their inflammation is wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is better to make them stronger, and they must be made stronger by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of healing is safe from the leakage and accumulation of blood and surpasses in value whether it is long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those who require the sausage to be administerited, it is required that they provide a softened mixture in the juice of green apples; if they are inflamed, treat them with the sausage three or four times, or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have a cold complexion, immerse them in the softened mixture of green apple juice before administering the sausage treatment; alternatively, use honey syrup with aromatic ingredients such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, along with fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if the palm has received the sausage treatment, after allowing some blood to flow, it is required that they inhale aromatic smoke from burning herbs and drink subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And utilize other things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for bloodletting.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to ply up their arms and then heal them again later, provided that it is weakened by much bleeding, so that they remain healthy little by little according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	:it'sainie : iefendant in the 10th siècle devisions. A:nagre itoversage sachievce.tissueda century owo (injourne'saint ouspastract in English frommeant: "Ionesupport, The French, a :to,sentence of theocurse.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who moves more on another side, he must move it back to its original position or to the next day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood in the wound that has already been drained, and it causes fever; therefore, it must be extracted in large quantities and expand the abscess until it starts to spurt.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then, as you treat all the conditions of healthiness, and put your hand on his body when he feels well, so that his wound does not reopen with spurting.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens many times when the healthier one neglects it.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary when you see the limb being untied, and extracting blood again from that second time, because the abscess has closed up. Then you must apply pressure firmly on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	And if it's not broken, you should extend the arm slowly, because that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	But let it remain healthy for a second time; or if you touch the sharp edge too closely, then all of its contents would be expelled from the vein.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And place it in water with just a little bit of pressure applied gently on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has leaked, let it remain and not constrict it; as long as its inflammation is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to extract blood the second time, make sure it remains healthy in that vein; either there or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in his arm is healed from the source of that same vein because it's composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of sanctification is that the sick person pours hot water on their hand until the skin turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	And if it is stiffened, then let the vein open well, now heal it in a narrow and short manner.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And if there are wide fistulas, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and it cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water again, and let the wound be treated with hot water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in the air, do not reheat the hand with hot water, because you would expose it to more moisture than necessary.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing practice for this vein is more protected from all other veins, as it does not involve arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing practice for treating the hand's right side is equal to all liver diseases in value (dou foie), and that is how it works.
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Straighten out the hand and heat it in hot water until the vein becomes visible, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the hand heals in a narrow and short manner, and you manage to do everything properly throughout, there should be no complaints.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not push too hard, for the nerves are all without flesh on them.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then reheat the hand in hot water if it becomes frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out on its own.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as you know how (trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est), then place oil and string over it to fasten quickly (mets sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment), and thus perform for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The healing practice for the left hand is equal to that of mouse disease (maladie de la mice), and do it as I'ran said concerning right-hand treatment.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	:secrets quarrant andre la mots. Aidons le castelettrans fromage de:rue thekes of ounsesque it'ardirecture. Cajuste tire. :meet encien(10cortsoule, akeinfect.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	As if like diseases of the marsh, and retention of flowers, and disease of rain, and old knees and ankles, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his sanctity is that he applies hot poultices on the wound until it disappears.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And above the joint of pain; and the vein is at the ankle, and through it there goes much rain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And it becomes then either lesser rain or wider at the ankle, where movement is lost.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you clean it up in the vein, and warn of those who are there with it, and treat its healing as well as when cured from illness; and let it be aflame again.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out, then put the pain back in the water, and let the vein well drain out.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the surgeon fails to remove it on the first attempt, then attempts a second time above a little bit, for the wound is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make of equal pieces the other side alike.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The wound from the vein is near the knee, and its treatment is similar to that of backache when it is due to bleeding.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of his treatment is that it causes pain between bathing and elevation above the knee, stretched in four directions; it twists when turned.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein would not open; and if it opens, then you can treat it in all possible ways that are appropriate for your practice, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worth doing so, because the wound is dry, and it can be repaited mostly by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, then there will be no relief for its patient when the wound opens or closes on either side of his feet, and in small movements, nor will they warn him about his nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And do the same with the blood so that you see it, and then loosen its bandage, and put a cloth over it and tighten it up; now she is healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	Venous treatments or procedures involving vacuum devices are typically used for removing excess fluids from wounds or to promote healing in certain conditions. Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) therapy is one such treatment that uses a negative pressure environment around the wound site to expedite the healing process and reduce the risk of infection.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Vacuums are made of horns, or bones, or wicker; and suction is performed according to different methods: either by making an incision and attracting blood with a forceps, or feeling the wound to guide the procedure. This description could be related to historical practices where materials like horns or animal parts were used in medical treatments, including procedures that involve creating negative pressure for suction therapy.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction which is felt by the wound is done according to different methods: either it is at full heat, or it involves fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And suction made by incision and extraction of blood is performed in four different ways: either at the corners of the joints;
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Because one stays on the top of him; and the other goes around his neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	Taille :ent illement d'une toundres ains, dansreve la parole decoin leves of theflesmejourment from: "Ivale icesiours invention. It isuremétalongé. Leser lion.from nowmes, orignalexentail:surname. itensicle. Whichera.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the suction cups for both shoulders; and the suction on the elbows.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the suction cups on both arms; and the suction cups on both legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the suction cups on the knees; and the suctioning does not treat with blood, for it involves small incisions spread across the skin.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And because of this they do not hesitate, as one would do with vein puncture work.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it does not insist that she should be treated with heat or cold, in any disease resulting from accumulation, until all the organs are cleansed.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if for necessity or custom the patient needs suctioning, we may use it at the beginning of each month or at its end, and in every ten days.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are such who, when they need to be suctioned, become heavy with it.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are such who experience accumulation and rheum in their body, and in their head, and darkness around them.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have a trickle of blood in their mouth, and have fled the tongue, and receive more blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if I come across such individuals who think about bleeding with blood, nausea, pain, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, immediately when it is the end of each month, we order suctioning to be done two hours after midnight.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The suctioning of the mouth helps to loosen the head ... which is causing these issues, and it does not insist that this be done after evacuating all the organs.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this suctioning is related to the treatment of the skull (cephalic).
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it does not insist that those with cold constitution or who have been ill should use it, as this can cause great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason they do not insist that patients use it at nighttime, nor those who have cold diseases in the head or body.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal from it often become forgetful, and for this reason they should put the suction cup somewhat further back due to overconfidence in its effectiveness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The suction on the neck is part of the treatment of the head and chest (torso), and for this reason it has some restriction.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and at the opening of the channel of the vein, and in the head, and in accumulation;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	:surely's oncause thea: "Cures fromentrologie aye (itume : Ijulgarment, Aesme. It. Thexent 10. Whiches of thevague to :125 : Age. Forse.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The windings of two ribs that are twisted together cause the pains at the top and bottom of the chest, and cataracts and glaucoma, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the rule of the sanctuary; and it requires that you command the saint to express his hand when placing it, not to compress the artery, and not to draw blood from a wound.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings of the mouth cause illnesses of the mouth, and gum disease, and similar afflictions in the mouth; and it is in the rule of the two lips' sanctuary.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and overfilling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The windings of the ribs are as much as three swords in two arms.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	For it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And commands the saint not to pierce too deeply; for his hand is unarmored and knows about veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction on the backbone causes foundation diseases and similar afflictions in the area; it requires that the suction be large and made of leather, as it must well perform its task; and if it were too subtle, it would break, and it would cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs tighten well, because they draw blood from the whole body; they are equivalent to old wounds caused by rain and mudslides, and bladder issues, and rashes; and they are in relation to the two sanctuaries of sinews and ankles, and all these things weaken the body's structure over time, and cause painful conditions in various ways.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way of placing the suction cup is that you empty it first and immediately afterward, move quickly, and rotate evenly, and keep doing so until you see the color reddened and swollen on the vein; then remove the cups and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are some who have a lot of charity, and pure pores: it requires only one time to inflict wounds wide; and draw out blood deeply.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is large, it must allow to wound two times: the first time for subtly opening the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very high, it must allow to wound the third time; and when we try to draw out little blood from the bone twice, we are only successful once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we draw out a lot of blood, we often replenish it; and when the bone is very high, they pierce it quickly, and its end ends up being so tightly sealed that it cannot be distinguished.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and must allow for the one who has thick skin and hard muscles, that you anoint the hairs of the suction cups with oil aperient and dissolvent:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is so, of violet oil, or honey-sweet almond oil, or seed oil from cucurbit.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in water, of cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is excessively large and cold, you take vinegar, or balm, or acetin oil, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if that one is healthy with tender skin and wide muscles, it does not need to be anointed with oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it must be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or marigold water, or seed oil from the gourd, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, they lift it up with ash, or marigold water, and sumac, and the like.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses lift them up with strong wine, or marigold water, or anet decoction, or chamomile decoction, or something similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not need to use the suction cups before or after bathing, but an hour later; and never sleep again after suction.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and must be warmed up when it needs to be suctioned and when it is moist.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And warm those who are irritable, and if the bone is too hot and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	and must make it cold things, like pomegranate seeds and endive leaves and lettuce in ash, and the like.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and boil puccinia (a type of mold), castor seed, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	and those who have a cold complexion must use honey syrup and slightly sweet wine (between strong and weak), and boil it a little, and also the puccinia and small birds and feathers.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	Theology in Old French: leuinse dexprime la peytain d'arme, les meine defface touninjourne çoins tolk. Itajustice. In English translation of theorein aoutrake jurisin it'ree.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some people at times cathartic or musk before the windings, or afterwards, in order to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and remove it subtly but he does not require those who drink very hot beverages.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the belly, and on dropsy (edema), and on the stomach and bowels, and on headaches, because in these parts they do not suffer from injuries either.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and they do not make it for the purpose of drawing blood from a limb into another limb.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we do to the breasts when the child is not born; in order to reduce the viscousness that exists in the member, as we put suction cups on the abdomen and on the bowels to diminish the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and the pain, when it has an operation or incision performed on it, where it is attracted by its virtue to draw out the operation through chance, or drying up the joint of its socket.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and then it makes her in this way when we put them on the liver and belly where there is retained windiness.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these vacuums are approved as empty because they evacuate so much; and sometimes they are approved together fire, and sometimes water poured.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	if in diseases of profuse tears, and in such a way the suction cup is filled with hot water, or with water heated by boiling certain herbs available for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup given fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it is two-thirds of the length and half of a palm wide, and has its edge turned into the middle, like when one pushes in a small hole, as if to insert a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and if the wound is rainy, then let him not put the cauterized member on the body.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And in such an age or else that is not, it has been disle, en siemps toi le.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	The ices sansprevene desilk a la boneforses la cestin theur esle :soutil'surey ilthe preteils:meslay. Injury.ioun,
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's suction cuffs are not like old people or fat individuals.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should it be placed on this limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the candle wax or something similar, and place it between the arm where the suction cuff is attached,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that it shines at the bottom of the suction cuff, not burning the patient's flesh;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and you must put it at the puncture that we have mentioned, so when they see it, if there is a vapor coming out, and where the suction cuff will be placed;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take the same material if you have practiced; and repeat often, if you know how.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cuff which is used in treatment for pleurisy at all times has no vein or puncture, and it is only applied when the fluid accumulation becomes clear, and then placed on the limb just so.
et c’est li forme:	And that's what it looks like:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cuffs are not applied only to members where they can be placed with minimal discomfort, like in the mouth and gums, as well as similar cases.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the cases where they are cut or removed, as with teeth and gums, and similar situations;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of its use is that when you try suction cuffs which are clear in sweet fluid accumulation without significant pain, then you must do so.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put it into the sweet fluid accumulation as long as they are small, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then you are supposed to know about the veins and suction cuffs, then rub the limb so much that it is reddened, and place them on the skin.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are placed upon it, and we can put it after that;
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	:wars. Cecele. Whatfieres precious. ce. oflere cestacula un: theures lesur. Theu'ses. (itmeatine. ounces it:nce: theles tocumace.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if their hair is healthy after the heart of the snake, and a piece of cold linen wetted in water, and placed on it, so long as the venom has not dissipated.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple times, place it on broken glass or salve and similar things, until the venom has dispersed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or place it near the joint mostly covered with fine flour, and let them dry on the joint, if now they will stay.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more experience, then take other venomous snakes.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the snake's venom does not attach itself to the joint, then smear it with fresh blood or pierce it deeply enough so that the venom drains.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then place it on, and immediately as they feel the warmth of the blood, if they dry up.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them itching, sprinkle a little aloe and sand on them or ashes, if now they will be relieved.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the Book of Bones.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they concern the restoration and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Learn, my child, that the wise physician says of this chapter, which he has never seen in any ancient books or letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason is it extraordinarily rare in our land, as I have not found a single good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it because through the study of ancient books and by means of experience in my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained therein and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the bones that are presented, as I did in these 13 previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore it is that we declare the prologue of this book and summarize its contents with our words and chapters arranged according to their understanding, so that those who have experienced can know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or dislocation comes to no one, it must be that you thoroughly examine the injured part of the patient on both sides, so that nothing is overlooked, whether it's a weak heart, spleen, kidney, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Or if it is too cold or too hot; and handle frozen meat, which are icy battles, feathered arrows, and do not drink wine, eat no fat foods, and fill the body with meats that do not overfill joint cavities, until you have doubt about dislocation or swelling of tissue, then restore the injured part to its previous governance which he had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bone is fractured, it must be that you wrap the injured part with viscous foods that make a lot of noise, such as bread cooked in water and fire and testes, and pies made of any type of meat, and wine and things similar.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For it represents the crackling noise, so soon the bone fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	Or:re deuke.ses leu.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but without care, reset the broken bone with large nails that hold and join the limb together, until it forces so as before; and not all of his work, and for this reason he needs to consume large meats, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures occur in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the main fracture is different from the secondary fracture, or of the leg, and I will tell you all types of breakage in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is also fractures that lead to avulsion, and others caused by thinning, like the tip of a quill used for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a breakage with wound, and a breakage consisting of a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each type has its treatment, and its specific instrument for restoration, as that memory comes to mind.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known the bone fracture by the fact that the edges are twisted, and well opened by force, and pressed with one's hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or dislocation in the joint, and the painless patient has not any fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but he may well have twisting, or fissure, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it doesn't require you to move it with your hand, but apply afterwards the medicines that come hereafter, and then restrain it subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know that the fractures which lead to avulsion, and the two joined parts, it is necessary now to put them equally, so as not to open the wound again.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the wounds come, if there are no more days left until the wounds become healed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it in the same condition as you move lightly and carefully, and you know that the restoration of this one is lighter than its previous or later ones; then restrain it, just like we have said.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are small pieces, if it involves two parts, whether it's limbs or ropes, or one of them is small members, or a string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, if the pieces of both sides are displaced, reset by all instruments in their position you can move them, and make sure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And well join the two bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel the hand well if you think it is not perfectly: if it slightly increases, and do not tighten it too much, nor press as they do to bring it back with their work through incision and stretching of the limb, as we have often tried.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at a critical point, if it cures well the sick patient that it does not move, neither in sleeping nor waking, turning or any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And take good care that the limb is so secure that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, it is not necessarily so, and he must put the patient in such a state that they do not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep it straightened so that twistedness does not occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken limbs are various in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For it has small members like brass and iron, if indeed so: it must be wrapped with thin, soft linen cloth.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those who are large, like cuffs and legs: it must be wrapped with a wide, stiff bandage because the wide bands embrace the entire large limb, pressing evenly from all sides, so that there is no hard spot.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then bandages are tied tightly around moving joints, two or four turns depending on the limb, with a hand pressing somewhat all over the bandage, and pulled upwards from above the fracture, pressed less so that the fracture moves slightly away.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage a little at a time so that you cover well the healthy part of the limb, then another bandage is put back up over the fractured limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part above the fracture, and press gently, not too hard nor too lightly, as we said in the first chapter.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	and place between the bandages of linen or cloth so that they are all even, then tie one by one around the shoulder, and put them well placed if there is an abscess.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	La grande parte de thee li la partide it.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then is the traction applied to the staves, and they are of a moderate length of one thick cane for retention, or from wood used for crafting poles, or reeds of palm tree, and arranged according to this form:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it must be that the staff placed on the fracture is slightly larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And also long enough as it should be for a small or large limb.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then the traction is applied to the staves also as you have done in the first instance, and placed above a woven band like in the first case on the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	Then either made narrower or wider, and it must be that the band is moderately sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the band is thick, like I have described in works of men who make their bindings with twisted linen cords, and this constitutes great error, because the traction cannot be equal if it is too fine; there is no need for it to differ by less than a double space between each staff.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the maladies are aggravated by dislocations of the staves after traction on their healthy sides, then place in them linen socks or woven linen strips to prevent it from bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When there is a fracture and the injury is torn apart, I will discuss the treatment for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And remember it's not necessary to apply traction to all members with fractures on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, there is no need to place staves on them until after approximately two or three years, depending on your discretion and skill as a practitioner.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And now let's look at the ancient methods for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and is it that you use flour held in the walls of a millstone, mixed with plenty of water, making this concoction neither too thick nor too thin, and using it as such; this common method of restoring a fracture has been applied for various positions, especially to women and small children, because it is not excessively hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	In another way to restore the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take away and lick and oil and gum resin and about 10 of them; mirrhe and aloe, about 5 of them; elecampane, about 7 of them; and make a powder, and honey with wax of bees; if the patient's condition is hot, use this remedy, for it has good composition, and quickly mends broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to treat twisting that is worth: take mugwort and wormwood, about 10 of them; mirrhe and aloe, about 7 of them; aconite, about 6 of them; Armenian bitters, about 10 of them; grind well, and cook with water or honey-wax mixture, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to treat dislocated joints and deformed bones, and alleviate the pain experienced by cutting into them; take a new lining, and moisten it with fine clay mixed with cooked oil, and place it on the affected area. These remedies do not restore them but are good for easing acute pain, and treating the bones properly in terms of pain relief.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to heal broken bones that is effective: take dried fig leaves and earthy mallow leaves, grind them together, and prepare the poultice (medieval poultices often used organic materials believed to have restorative properties; fig and mallow are plants with historical medicinal uses for supporting skin health).
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for the restoration of bone fractures and to alleviate post-fracture pain involves using wormwood root, chamomile flowers, violet flower petals, flour from 10 times (implying 'about 10'), mix one part; grind it together, and prepare the poultice with wine (wine was commonly used in medieval medicine for its disinfectant properties); apply to limbs which are swollen. Alternatively, use a water-soaked chamomile or just plain water or vinegar mixed into the poultice, and utilize it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method that surpasses the first for restoring the limb after an aposteme (injury); take wormwood roots and seed of flax ('flax' is mixed in equal parts: 'linen', linseed, and broom, and violet flowers, and chamomile flowers, allot one part; grind it, and confit with water, or pure water (in medieval times, to restores the injured limb.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	There is in Ypocras's book no mention of putting wax and oil on the broken limb to restore it because he says none other thing more; and that it should be neither too soft nor too hard, and said it should be two or three fingers thick.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems to Galen that wax and things dried slightly warm should be placed on the broken limb for restoration purposes; similar to myrrh, aloe, and incense, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of impalement that is worth mentioning in terms of injury and pain: take mugaths and chickens' feathers, or sharpened sticks to a similar size, and hit them repeatedly to break them apart; then use these as an implement for impalement and inflict wounds.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then he takes it slightly afterward, and taking care that the patient does not feel any pain from his maladies or have a misplaced bone in its original position; if so, he dislocates it using his hands again.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain occurs at the joint or itching, numbness, swelling, if you rush, then dislocate and impale immediately; take a light drape, damp sea sponge, submerge in water, raise the limb until the itching stops, and alleviate the pain thereafter.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry towel moistened with water or oil, and lay it over a nail until you are certain there is no risk of reopening the wound.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And relieve the inflammation in both members and soothe the pain, then resume treatment delicately, and apply only a little impalement at first, and do not exert it as strongly as before, gently until they are restored to health.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the incision and wound and pain and swelling are all in one joint, and you have to straighten it out and bind it, if it relapses, as you did in the first place.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not happen in any of the parts we have mentioned, let it dislocate for two, three, four or five years, depending on what is seen, until the fracture heals and approaches the previous alignment.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And let the first restraint be stronger than before, and it will swell its flesh as I have said earlier; and if you see the joint loosening more than necessary, you know that no further dislocation can occur.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Use the warm water baths for every time it dislocates, and let each day pass with one or two changes of dressing.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this method of treating the dislocations in the joints, hasten the healing process; observe what my fellow physicians do wrongly when they restore the twisted limb: it is bad, and if these procedures are feared, I see nothing but restraint and careful treatment.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture treatment
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many methods of fractures are therein described, along with various types and their causes identified. This statement refers to a comprehensive description within the medical text detailing multiple fracture treatment options that correspond with different injuries (types), as well as the underlying reasons for each fracture. This level of detail suggests an attempt at understanding not just how to treat but also why certain conditions occur, aimed at improving patient outcomes.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	because there are fractures caused by sword blows, and the bone breaks along its entire length where it is struck against the other bone, as if hit or hammered; for this reason, I have called this method of breaking "the hachuring." This passage describes a specific type of traumatic injury—fractures inflicted by swords (hachuring), highlighting how certain fracture types were named based on the mechanism of injury and its physical characteristics.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword pierces through with excessive force, and for this reason I have called this method of breaking "the absolute" (absolute fracture); and it is the wound produced by these two or three such fractures, whether large or small. This segment speaks to a different classification of traumatic injuries—those caused by excessive force with a weapon like a sword (absolute fractures), referring to how the severity and type of injury can be indicative of both treatment approach and prognosis.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been pierced or shattered by a blow, or of bone splinters from a cut stone, or of fall on footstone, or other similar things. This excerpt lists various injury types that may occur in the medieval period and would be relevant to treatments and classifications within a medical text discussing trauma care practices. It reflects an era where injuries were often categorized based on their presentation rather than underlying pathology as understood today, which is essential for historical contextualization of these texts.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that approaches the skin on the bone, or it lies on the bone, and it'rante of such wound, whether large or small. This passage refers to an injury wherein not only its extent in depth—a broken bone withstanding close contact from the wound; this is thexalme, siens parole de la terre enchaufe cuitre, et est quinze jor seing ofse desgerme.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	s, the flesh,se sengre.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by a cut with a sword, or falling, or something else, and brings the lower bone fragment into it, and its edges are formed like those of a blacksmith when he pierces below the brazier; if it enters through the middle.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more under those who have moistened bones like in children;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are scattered as if they were themselves; and I will speak about this topic directly.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all methods of fractures by the drawing away from them, and the inquiry into them, and through the corrupted one that is over them;
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is considered by this because when the bone is discovered and scraped over it, if the crack appears black;
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, take into account two unpleasant things; and if you see no bad accident, like vomiting of blood (hemorrhage), loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever with a cold sweat, the bone fragments coming out and turning red, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, then there is no doubt that one cannot be sane.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see an apparently non-serious accident, and you hope for salvation, as the treatment begins;
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navet (blood vessels) comes first to you, and it's winter, there is an obligation for you to remove the bone within four months;
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in the estate (state), and you hasten to remove the bone within seven days; so that the tissue around the bone is not corrupted, and those accidents we have mentioned come about;
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the injury of ou.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	: the. Thees cesanapresse tolere it'sall andace decade :xentleave:oldrement, ate quat. (it: "Gothicure la. Thises. Audexentreson. Thejacres.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed, and prevent the discharge of blood; then begin to break into the bone as per this method: one way is that you push the narrow piece forward, and it is done according to .ij. procedures.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another more extensive version of the previous technique.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various small and large tools, pointed ones and iron-made ones; and in practice, do it swiftly so as not to bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, it must be pierced inside so that you apply tools with traps, not allowing them to penetrate beyond the bone's end, and there should be above the tip of the tool a margin or circle, which does not let the tool pass over the bone; and you need many more things in this manner, so that each layer from the inner side of the bone is trapped by all tests. And it is the form of .ij. tools with traps:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of the tool used to pierce the bone is that you apply a trap on the bone, and turn it around until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put the trap in another place afterwards, and do this thoroughly, then cut along the bone's space between the teeth with the incisors, doing it more subtly as we have said, quickly enough so that you can grasp the bone in your hand or any of the tools you have like pliers, pickles; and make sure that you do not touch the brain nor the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is required that you remove the trap from the bone with all .ij. instruments resembling a toothed tool but it must be softer and more subtle than the other toothed tools.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there is no delay in dealing with small bones or fragments, then treat the wound with tenting and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is what the Greeks said, which was more salutary; and it was greatly effective, as their word goes.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is required first that you remove a part of the bone where the break was made; once you have removed this piece, then place the lens-shaped toothed tool over the head of that part, as its form is like so:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side only, and the part is divided into .ij. sides, so that the cutting tool is directed towards the bone; then beat it gently with a small hammer above, doing it swiftly so as not to damage the skin underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, do so swiftly, because it will harm and cause of injury; et deffre diz laine:
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	scellularre ofsesculiers. Aimer. oulden theire jurs century. Allonger. Theil: Intervengustra :ces inu soustromente.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If a king is before great razors, and after more subtle ones, and continues to do so until he is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of these other hair and subtle breakages, it is required that you prepare according to its degree; and this is something that has not been returned by those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is discovered, it requires that you take care of it in one way or another: firstly, a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and with oil mixed with rose petals, and apply it on top of the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another linen piece doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine mixed with rose oil, and place it on top of the first linen; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then gently apply a second layer of linen, without pressing too hard, just enough that the liquid does not stain the wound only.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it on for a day or two until the skin is calmed, then remove it, and apply other medications as you may like, such as root of lily roots, flour, incense powder, alchemist's mixture, and similar things; from these things make pills to put on the wound, and thereafter apply medicine with no biting sensation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound is then clean and free from any oozing or clotting, for you should not leave any residue there, nor allow blood to accumulate, because when a clot forms on the brain's surface (interpreted metapromatically as 'toilet'), it can become rigid and harden, which is harmful. For whenever something with a biting effect is placed on the wound, if it causes too much disruption, great suffering befalls the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care, however, if any unfortunate event occurs to the patient, as we have mentioned before, there is doubt about it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if there are no more troubles other than those caused by the remedies applied on it, then its virtue must be shown in that case; and it is required to treat a portion of honey, two parts of rose oil, and mix them with one piece of linen, and put them on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the care of methods that are to be done so long as he is sound.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	ilum : lexentire aage. ici. thee.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is fractured, it must be that you make your little hole or puncture near where the break is not, and place equal to this crack on the index of your doorpost, and then in front of it, until the break returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this firmly, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the crack is above the doorpost and cannot come to rest in place, it must be that you put equal weight at the top of a rod a little bit larger.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the crack is of two parts, make another one like it, and hasten to restore it within a year, if you can do so.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or twelfnih time when the abscess is pacified, then place at the top of the doorpost a tent-like covering made of flax, if the crack is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you make another one of the other parts if the crack is there; and let the tent-like coverings be large enough to fill in the doorposts' holes.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that the tent-like coverings must be made of burlap and worn every day. I do not think it is right, but it must be soaked in a mixture of alewife skins and powdered millstone; then leave the covering until the bones are set and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put down the goose feathers on the doorpost of the tent-like coverings, and if one such sheet is torn, and it holds the crack there, blow upon the patient's limbs among these things, so that you may see what happens to him; make a hollow where he lies.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes to the doorpost while you do your work, then place a bit of pitch or cotton wetted in roselle oil there, or in some small quantity of diaphoretic substance.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess does not come to the doorpost, make an emplaster of barley flour and powdered incense, with alewife skins, and place it on lit candles, and do not move hisne.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	n: ici. (12ndirentence.goverse.compreasurement. It'sur itentire:sentiment.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	santocionste:sentent (2yvessexive andrementumente itesuke.  :naughtesse a capithefe citerneceillecites. Andrexaccuse tarde. Heauxtement.yevecteveille menture de ceance topeutextexentifreconsexat’udexiclelore quelex sentisse,èxentisseable.ise,celan au clacheletifreintes siurnecekent miecquexse jusquessexentures:l nudexse causement lèves. ceille
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the procedure of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no preexisting wound, and the fracture has healed completely without being displaced much, and not split in two, since the cavities within do not move significantly if known.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required that if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you place your index finger in the mouth of the Malade with the displaced bone; and if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, you hold your index finger of the right hand there, apply pressure to the fracture gently, move the other hand away for safety, and keep everything even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the displacement of the jawbone fracture is at a point near the teeth (indicated by ".ij."), it must be ensured that you gently extend this part (.ij.) so that it remains aligned. In this instruction, the focus shifts to addressing specific locations where dislocations may occur in relation to dental structures or specific points on the jaw near the teeth. The phrase suggests a cautious approach to extension at such critical junctures to maintain proper alignment and avoid further injury.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if compression occurs due to movement or procedure (indicated by "ou routure"), when strapping with a gold or silver thread, or silk, place the fractured jaw undernee a double cloth; and put on the second cloth a large piece of leather, equal in width to the mandible, along which you bind the patient so that they can rest comfortably. In this instructional sentence, it describes an advanced procedure for managing dislocations involving compression with specialized materials like gold or silver threads (or silk) and custom-fitted cloths or leather bandages designed to support a fractured mandible while allowing the patient to lie down safely. This method emphasizes comfort and stabilization, ensuring that the patient is advised to rest and consume easily digestible foods after initial treatment.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you observe that the figure changes, and then reset it to its original state; and place underneathe a fine powdered flour or fine breadcrumbs afterward; and lay over the linen cloth lightly, and let the displacement of the Malade does not change, so it is well for .ij. days. In this instruction refers to rehabilitate the patient's jawbone fracture with an abscesses leather by farinette malades duodenum.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	:mein a ices de cestillemente tottes in: "Aragon. Thises (1203. Fromages arme'sans on itiunees of theur duce and taille desires A l’orit:2. The same36ene, butenage frommetal dextracta. Injury, andre.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if it has a fracture and wound together, reward him with no bone fragment from the os; so delicate is the os surface that its edges are almost invisible to the eye.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with blood according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all these bone fragments, and it does not take any time at all, if the wound is wide, and place on it such fragile os pieces that can be easily connected to aid in closure until healed.
de la forcele	from the fracture (or break)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks more than once before the shoulder, toward the spine, and the break is according to three manners: or it is broken and displaced in two directions, and there are pieces, and it is lighter to restore; or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations when the break is with wound, where you should have two ministers (or assistants), so that one tightens the sling around the injured area where the fracture occurs; and the other stretinas the col toward its part; then equalize the dislocation at the required place, so that it forms as it should, without any apparent or lingering injury.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the expertise to extend further, then place on the patient's back a round ball of cloth or linen according to your need; and are gentle with the sling, and hold the ball in your hand so that you can position the fracture equally, as it is intended.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot remove the head of the sling after some time because it sticks to the wound (em parfont), then it is necessary that the patient be gently supported on his bed, and place over the shoulder one or two pillows; let your assistants hold the shoulder upwards, so long as the bone fragment of the sling rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then bring the fracture to your place, and if you find fragments, it requires that you cleave them lightly; and draw out pieces gently, and let the bone not join anytime. Put on top of this instrument, in order to guard it.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	seigneur le pècun laisse:iciel a l’it and thisures theur loire de cestrail.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	reveuletentheurrevelasthe ells hevaille:partuledgesnelles ieuille (loreuxscius �anissewentyqueunchelevesseches ifis levé lesaincel outrainifiecuses in tandresiveuses, tophie
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if during an incision arrows come, then it brings together a little cloth soaked in oil and hay and linen, and places it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when it is feeling wounds and pain from cutting, put on top of the bone a powder of miller's pepper and burned buckwheat flour, and place lightly resting supports above, and attach a screw if you have experience with it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very broad band of one palm wide, and place two resting supports under it, and apply the powder; then take a thin tablet of three fingers long and wide, and wrap around that band to keep the head of the band in position.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the tablet above the fracture, and turn the band under the neck, and around both sides of the support, and when you see that each part holds firmly to the crack, and clearly sees that the tablet does not move from above the bone, then reinforce it every day for each year as long as the slipping occurs, and when the band slips again, tighten the restraint.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and lay the patient on their back, and place a little strap underneath the support so that it can lift the dislocated shoulder up; this alignment of the spine helps reduce the force on the fracture, or tie the arm to the collarbone, so that misalignment does not lead to accidents for about 20 years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then resume the powder application if you have experience with it, and maintain the restraint until it is restored, up to 27 years for some people, but not for others.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture in the shoulder blade area.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	There is not much occurrence of the shoulder blade fracture or dislocation that occurs without injury and does not result from impact; if it is located according to the shape of the fracture, and you wrap accordingly, in all ways you can; then take a little powder with miller's pepper and burned buckwheat flour, lightly place two resting supports above it, and under that double cloth band; put a thin tablet about three fingers wide, slightly wider than the shoulder blade area; and wrap it around so that there is no movement at all of the tablet in any part of the shoulder blade, if you reinforce it tightly with linen ties; then maintain strong restraints on it every year until the fracture heals completely within 27 years or less. And once these steps are completed, when it is moved and loosened, be careful because this does not involve bones that move easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and does not point outwards, then make it subside, and heal the fracture in the dislocation; do as we have said about the shoulder blade fracture.
de la brisure dou pis	from the fracture of the fracture.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	invenables cestant voie meves, et quin ansentle itaimes la. Et alainme devisi theoromes vat legeant: "itain'safemens devisionne.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient should lie sideways on his two shoulders, and a stick is placed between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulder blades, and brings together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly apply equal pressure to all the maneuvers you can do, so that the bone' bon appears as it should; then place on elevated plates or salts above the sternum, or another lighter substance, and wrap in one cloth, and the blood under the bone is prevented from moving; and turn the joint back to its natural position, and hold firmly without causing pain, and reward each hour of labor, and if it softens, so you hold; and if it needs dislocating, by corrosion or pruritus that comes on the surface, or pain or abscess, then hurry up, and dislocate it, and address to him who has done similar treatments. Then reseat the plate until it is sound again.
de la brisure des costes	The break of the ribs.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The break of the ribs does not occur due to their size after the back and in front, but rather because they are hardened; and one feels well about this inquiry.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the treatments are that you apply equal pressure to the break, if it needs; and then place on an elevated board, and hold with a stick, if you have experience with this.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is descending in front, then the patient feels great pain and pressure like pleurisy, as the bone pierces the flesh; and on one side they push and vomit a large amount of blood, which is very harmful sickness, and the old ones used great force.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are some who say that it should be administerited with foods that swell the stomach to push the break further down.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this at all, unless it is a case of abscesses that have come to us.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, then he will be well.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of them put on cups to the joint, because they think it suctions strongly, and that is seemly; nevertheless, there is doubt about whether the cups draw away the excess at the joint due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them think that the joint should be covered with moist linen in hot oil, and a tent is placed between the ribs to make the blood accumulation even, then either treat for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain from the bone that does not pierce the flesh, doubt arises in the patient, then it should be split above the broken ribs with some instrument to guard the fracture; and then treat with plaster bandages with rosined oil on top of it; and cure while treating this wound whether it needs treatment, and if abscesses come from that same coste. And when the patient lies thereupon.
de la brisure dou col	The break of the ribs.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Caut :il (Ogustre lesquels levesent. And Ile à pepe :loutrofein thevé leu peop2esu outlet meainglesaul,cumbre encompraises. In Frenchmeanture.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to any, and you see whether he will be sound or not, if you notice his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, it hurts; therefore he is mortally afflicted in various conditions, and if he remains still and feels well when we stretch and pull him, then you know that the joint between the bones is safe, and his painful condition can be cured if treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if it seems that the issue occurs in his backbone on the opposite side, and you see whether he is sound or not; if his vertebrae are softened, and there are injuries on their feet, and a forceful movement of his back causes hiccuping and vomiting with voluntary will; and when we have moved him onto his belly, if there is vomiting with voluntary will. And if he strains his back and wants to sit down, but cannot. You know that it is mortally afflicted: it does not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this injury does not affect him, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that if he has an abscess, you should treat it by placing rosette oil or egg yolk oil on his spine, soothing him until calm; then place him in one of those comforting restraining devices and bind him with a bandage, commanding the patient to rest there; and let him sleep without that part where he feels pain as long as he is sound.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, it must be covered in its place; then set the bone, and gather the two sides of the wound if they are large with a bandage, and treat it with healing ointment applied repeatedly until sound; and when his shinbone is fractured, which we call "knee-shins," you must thrust your pouch into your left hand, placing it in your other hand's palm as much as you can manage, then apply the restraining device and the crane above, if you know how; then bind the shinbone, and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the break of the shinbone (referred to as "brise" or fracture in Old French)
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often the shinbone is broken, and if it happens, it's a slight diminution at the top; and they make him walk with crutches, and bring him to the physician, and pain comes unto the patient's feet, and swellings come upon which the bone has been fractured.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over, until it is on the fracture; and you know what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is at the topmost point, then place it in the same way, as long as it maintains a natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines towards the sides, then make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture appears to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it in the same way, then place it on an iron or wooden stand, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and use the patient's leg below the knee, as long as the alignment is maintained.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to lie on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess comes near, do not touch it, until the abscesses are calmed down, and place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to the restoration, and hold it as required, unless there is no further complication; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is the area between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder; if it is dislocated, then it should be restored according to one of these two methods: either placing a thick slab of wood in its place, following this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And place the two hands over it, and raise them, and see the patient's dislocation from above; then cut his arm to the wood in such a way that it bends at the elbow, and make an upright support of wood under him, and extend any weight or other things that are necessary for stretching it, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that it is supposed to lie on his back, and place the hand under its collarbone, then command the two ministers to color those who are in front of the fracture with their hands, and have the others do this throughout all parts, extending each part as needed.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction seems to be further advanced, constrain a part of it under the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each minister'sup. If the fracture is near the shoulder joint, then place a stave in halfway between the scapula, and on the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the collarbone, so that it remains straight, and constrain itigre iesparolles.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the stone incises, do not restrain it within seven years, and place it moistly and rotten on a thin layer of oil until the incised stone is calmed; then you strain it, and the way to strain this so that you place the lump on the fracture, and hold the arm with the crutch, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breastbone; and spread the sheet, and restrain the crutch, and on the arm, so that the arm is straightened upwards, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use sticks, and place a larger and stronger stick on the fracture, leaving .i. distance of i. inches between each stick, making each stick so large that it passes over the fracture by .ij. inches from each part; then strain on the sticks as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, harder and less aligned.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the arrangement of the sticks and the straining, as we have said, when restoring the dislocated arm, and if you doubt whether the stone incises, then let it remain bound for seven years, as we have stated; then observe each .iij. year that the binding does not swell or fill at the joints, or the protrusions cannot reach the limb because it is too elongated, if you do so according to what we have said before.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such incident occurs after .iij. years or more, let the dislocated arm rest on its back and have his hands over his stomach; place the crutch with .i. spikes of wool evenly distributed along it, and observe each hour every day to ensure that the dislocated limb does not move or become soft at the joints; if this is done by virtue of medicine and we have previously mentioned a piece of meat given as treatment in small pieces so that the meat be first absorbed internally. And when he begins to recover, it should take .xl. years for both the crutch and leg to be fully rehabilitated; then it becomes customary for the crutch and leg to be relieved and treated with warm baths and ointments to strengthen the skin around the joint. If the straining is unsightly and swolnious, let it take .l. years or .ij. months before relief can begin.
de la brisure du bras	And of the fracture in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fusee", one small, and it is that which teaches the socket; and the other large, and is in front of the small joint there; perhaps only breaks the big fusee alone, or the little, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones are broken, treatment is easy, and healing; and when the large ones are broken, it is a bad healing, and more painful than when both are broken together. If only the small one has been broken, then little extension will suffice, and equalize.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large one that needs to be pulled more strongly; and extends on its finger, and raises the socket of the hand higher than the other, and the small ones should be lower than others, and either bend them towards themselves or their own finger, and a certain finger above him, so that the patient does not suffer any labor at all, then extend the ministers' arms to the part inside his hand, or to another point, and some other ministers to another position above. Then put the pins evenly according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage there are pieces, place each one back to its joint; and if there is no deviation in the bending of that knee, then do it with a piece of wood, and set it as we have said before. This part of the text suggests treating fragmented bones by repositioning them into their respective joints using an implement like a stick or another appropriate tool. It emphasizes assessing whether the injury affects the knee's range of motion (bending) and applying corrective measures based on previously discussed methods.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is an injury due to the dislocation, I have spoken of it with the individual master; take the treatment. In this context, the text implies consulting with or referring to a specific medical practitioner (individual master) for appropriate care and treatment when dealing with injuries such as dislocations in Old French medical terminology.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration an attempt to remove the screws does not succeed, then bind one piece of linen made from rosette oil and wax; it should not be too hard nor too soft; and lay that piece by gently lifting until the screws are soothed. Then apply ointment with a large amount of powder mixed with beeswax, place the stones or pins, making one larger than others near the dislocation; and it should have variously placed stones: whether they are in one of the bones, or two (the term "ij" likely refers to 'in joint'). Always pull more towards the dislocation rather than elsewhere, as we said at the beginning of the master'ayer; and make sure that the linen pieces near the dislocation are neither too hard nor too soft. Make the thread with linen, not too thick or too thin, like what we have mentioned earlier. And reward the limb and tendon after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	:meilleur tithes.aure ailte citéiage. Thex. Itun's.comme le monde. Thisene:0:
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	lentecelle deyngeriflesxueltifferre ( iauxellet if13revelle
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have mentioned does not come to the patient, then he will be freed within twenty years; or at least seventeen, then he should unbind his arms from his neck, and make them even on both sides, and guard against movement and stiffening, and sleep on his back; and you know that this breakage is restored in thirty years or forty, depending on the compositions and constitutions of its virtues.
de la brisure de la main	The break of the hand.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand there are few breaks, and it does not come but many bends.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the hand bone is broken or bent, it must be carefully turned in front of him evenly; then he places his hand on a stretranse, and extends the broken bones, making them equal again while they are well joined; and apply bandages and splints if there is no movement, and put a board according to the amount of displacement; and it must be wrapped in one sheet of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is near the edge of the sole of the foot, make a sponge with cloths, and instruct the patient to pull it out from his broken sole; then stretch a long sheet, and let the splint be as sturdy as the patient' bonnie feet, and hold it firmly in place, just like how it should.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the distal part of the hand, it must be put a board above it and another in the sole of the hand so that his hands are lifted upwards and straightened out, then bind the two sides together throughout the entire length of the hand.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break does not occur in any of these ways that we have mentioned, and it is in the pouches, then make them even; and bind with the sole, and if you see a small straight board to elevate the fracture so that it doesn't move again; and if the fracture occurs in other places such as the index finger or one of the others, then make them even, either all tied together, which moves well, or on a piece of wood like a pouch; and take care in restoring and positioning the limb properly, and guard against any that come back, just as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	The broken collarbone.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the collarbone are often broken, and when she turns in front and behind her; and the restoration is done by binding one piece above it and another underneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient sees his face, then stretches each minister to its equal side; and it is when the fracture is in between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is in front of the root of the collarbone, make one minister towards his throat and the other around the break; or if it's in the groin, and thus either put the pins near their legs, and let them be according to his natural figure. Then apply a splint, and bind with the limb, so that it doesn' Written on November 2018:
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has an abscess cut, let it heal first before returning to your work and treatment; the incision is made in part manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It must wrap around the fracture .i. sturdy band of .ij. or .iij., and in excess remove superfluous parts, then turn the leg so that the heel is at the root of the bruise, and insert a long string between the knee and thigh, behind the groin area, and fix one end to the bone above; then wrap around the leg and thigh with bandages, and place an upright support on the tibia bone; then cover the gap eight layers thick with linen soaked in oil for tightening the fracture; and as you move up along the fracture, loosening becomes less; when reaching .ij. to .iij. bandages placed above, and bringing back the string to its original position under the skin on the thigh, keeping the tension until it does not shift from its place, then let it remain as is, unless another sign appears such as swelling or bleeding.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it dislocates, and addresses the part where it comes from, as we have mentioned many times; and if there are pieces of bone that come off, you must keep them; and if one cannot retain them, then it is necessary to cut the skin, and extract them; and treat it in such a way that he is cured completely.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the kneecap done in such a way that bandages are placed on it, as in splints or braces; all this restoration done in such a manner does not affect the patient's pain and injury at all.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you know that the kneecap is restored within one year or less than a year, or more than a year, depending on individual variations in constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groin area.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	You know that in the groin area there is often only a slight tear, but it folds many times. And if it tears, it's just a fissure or puncture, and affects all wounds, and this pain, and such sensation is quite tolerable.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration if it is set up in such a way that whatever is required for its proper functioning is maintained as long as it can move; then place the bracelet, and put an upright support, if you have mastered this, and keep the tension as required, then repair all other injuries we have mentioned related to fractures, as well as abscesses or any similar symptoms. And for each specific injury that it requires, so long as it heals completely.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the leg's fracture.
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	And if the leg has two bones, and call one of them "mustelz", and the other apearly fracture as it comes to the arm, so muchoie restoration to be completely samearmes:
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones of the joint are broken together, turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if one thin bone is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, if he feels great pain and sees well; then turn it inside out. However, afterwards apply extension, place it level, but still, the fracture must be ugly, and there are more pieces than the extension being smaller and lighter according to your will.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have completed your work, take two ropes of woven wood that color the leg on one side and another part up to where the knee joints are above and below; then wrap them underneran and obervan around it, and tie in the middle so that the leg does not incline towards either direction, and thus it is well; and no one administers a bandage long from the leg, but if it has been dislocated, they put it back to guard against movement, and properly done, observe the place of injury where there was an opening in the fracture; and move it every day to see if there are any other accidents or symptoms; so cure until he is well.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of those two bones (os dou piet)
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	For the ankle there is no fracture, but those two bones never have a fracture and in few cases it happens that movement under greater pressure occurs.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if these two bones are fractured, and you see them protruding toward each other, put them in discomfort on the ground just like they would have gone flying; then place your joint over theirs, raise them up, now press them until they return to their original position with their ligaments; then use a supportive structure and weights above it, place a small cushion underneen the two bones, adjust the joint accordingly, wrap it in layers of cloth as needed for other necessary measures.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after some time has passed, if you move the bandage, because you will find the bones level, whether they are fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	:espace (old cafeilles. Itte pei's theuppe tol thexent. Iface : aire ape. AIDS. Ala fief decaum:age lain-faire arayle, lou pice, ascle.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you never forget the other things I have said about injuries that we have mentioned before; and for each type of accident, do what it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	The breakage of the bone in the jaw.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman is broken, if it swells up, then incline her back to the part of the spine and hold her by the rear; then fill her body with cotton, and put in as much as you would like; then raise the woman slightly and slowly, until the cotton reaches the entrance of the body, and returns the bone with its stocking; and when she wishes to piss, if the cotton is obstructed, remove it, and so do for about 12 years or more: this will restore the fracture. If you see a bladder of sheep's wool, tie it tightly around the puncture, and fill all of it with cotton; then blow into the bladder until the cotton has dispersed inside: the body will return to its former state; then leave filled for several years, as long as she is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone in the jaw of man or woman is broken, if it restores to that extent as we have said for the hipbone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For the breakage indicates more than one disposition towards the right path of healing: in other words.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the leg, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and place the leg in it; then wrap it with cloth, and leave for two or three years, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fractures with wound (open to the bone).
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is required for those who have a fracture with wound (open to the bone), especially if it is large like the hipbone or shoulder joint or similar; so that they are healed now, as our previous examples show.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, restore the fracture in that same hour or day when the abscess does not return; and if you do not have anything else, start to restore the fracture again during the same time period or year.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscess returns, leave the restoration for a new time period until it is calmed down again, not disturbing it at least one year or four months, because you may bring about a bad incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is appearing above the exposed part of the cavity revealed, it requires that you place it more quickly and with less extension of your hands.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not aid you in putting it equally at your hands, and if the physician has this instrument of iron which is about 12 or 13 cm long; and its length depends on the size of the wound. Therefore, for every fracture treatment, and heaped up to be III or IV centimoc, as much as it needs in each case of breakage, and thickened in front of his operation, and wide enough so that it does not folow the bone to the compressing force applied pressure upon him.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	. The French ous. Anderior;sic :"wairenque: entendure. Injury of frenchice toire.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, if the tool suitable for this purpose, whether it is an incision or a drill, then examine what causes delays in that broken bone and small fractures.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back, and it causes great pain afterwards, you know that it's not in its natural state anymore. If it remains thus for a while, then take one or two sponges soaked in black vinegar, and apply them properly to the area; do not put anything on the wound with oil or other substances unless you want to cause putrefaction and corruption. Then dress it as best as you have restored the bone, leaving the wound exposed, covering it completely according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound does not tighten around the fracture; and many times they tried this method with their patients, who either died or became corroded in some way. And make sure these treatments are more gentle and softer compared to other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that it may cause harm, then do not put anything on the sponges; instead wrap tightly with hard bandages around the area where the sponges were placed, and cover them again with soft bandages; but when after one year or two the bone begins to move back toward the wound, remove everything that has been applied to it so far, and put a healing ointment on the wound, as we have described similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is required that you dislocate the joint .i. times a day, morning and evening, as long as it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is required that the limbs be brought back to shape in such a way that the broken bone moves slightly downward regularly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if for three days pass and the broken bone cannot be reattached but returns to its original position, you know that it has small fragments of bone; therefore, you must try to treat the wound carefully and remove all these displaced fragments, as they cause great pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess or other form of corruption occurs at the site, you must treat it according to what is stated in this chapter by our teacher. And when the bone is broken and protrudes outward from the joint, as with shoulder or hip, or large limbs, do not attempt to treat it; many times die because they tried to do so, but leave it until it heals on its own; sometimes after twenty years or thirty, then care for the wound, if you can. And if you cannot care for it, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	and those caused by salt (referring to complications from saline-based treatments).
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We have seen many times after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is near the joint, and it's terrible to see how the natural movements are affected in the limb; and sometimes it can no longer perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	. ici leser, it’s. Thees: andre. Ceterial: : “n[asius. Inaute soothenerge ofr paste:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which becomes weak after dislocation.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone is set and then moves weakly afterward in its misaligned limb, it can occur for various reasons: because it was too tightly bound, unlike what it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, preventing the normal circulation of fluids to the limb; or due to numerous fractures; or due to excessive movements that do not happen in its proper time; or because there is little blood in its body, and therefore it becomes weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you feed and make the patient's body weak, until its defenses are multiplied within it; you also give him baths, and bring joy and ease to his soul; then place pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, often causing arrows to come out of water, until the swelling returns to normal.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The twisted member after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the members are twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart, and the misformed limb is abnormal in all aspects; it does not naturally belong to its work: those who say that one must break the member entirely when new do not convince me, and many wise men have done so on our land; these treatments are blamed, and can lead to great harm, sometimes even death. However, if there is inflammation and torture in the limb, it should be raised with warm water or mollifying herbs cooked like ivy leaves, roots, etc., similar medicines; then take an emollient remedy, as well-made cayenne pepper, and grind musk lichen with linseed oil or pig fat, and apply the emollient to it. Or you could use fat figs ground with flour of chickpea, similar medicines that alleviate stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is no occasion to constantly rub and apply pressure on the limb for extended periods of time; rather, alleviate any movements in the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twistedness is old and hardened, like stone, it also requires to be osteered with iron so that it covers the bone at the subtle incision lightly; and apply compresses and study in its treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This marks the beginning of the books on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is due to no joint remaining in its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb becomes poorly shaped, with the patient experienited great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs at any point, it must now be aimed to restore movement sensationally.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, it swells, and perhaps may be set with pins to the joint; for he does not allow that it can move at all. Many times have caused fevers and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	C100 avenant apres laisse leu: se desanre deffensee lou esprit aultes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I ordered the chirurgeons' treatises on dislocations of the head just pressed into place.
des mandibules	Of the lower teeth (mandibles).
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is rare for the mandibles to dislocate outwards and their displacement depends on: or they are a little piece of bone from their sockets, and slightly loose; or they are completely displaced, hanging down towards the chin, and it prevents them from holding saliva in the mouth, closing its mouth, and enveloping its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various attempts.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset immediately, without hesitation or delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a way that the minister inflicts great pain on the head of the malady, and thrusts one hand'suponning its root into the part of the dislocation inside the mouth if it is from any portion; and orders the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the minister places it back in its place, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is gripped, immediately both dislocated mandibles are brought together with warm water and oil until they are loosened slightly; without hesitation or delay, as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset correctly, and the mouth of the malady closes well and becomes softened, then cover it with a cloth made of oil roses and wax, and loosely tie its ends.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the malady lies on its back, and his teeth are between two cushions, not allowing them to move to the right or left, without trying to alleviate with light meat until the pain subsides and the jawbones return to their normal position.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then wash it gently as he wishes, and does not open the mouth to eat or drink until the jawbone is well-healed and sound again.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibules cannot be brought back to their original position within an hour, and are not converted again to their sockets, then they get fevers and habitual colds, and sometimes even suffer from stomach flu with vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it's dangerous; and many times those who suffer from it have died within seven years.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot displace the lower jaw in its continuation and at the backside, and it is never displaced again, and he feels well with them.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the malady lies on its back, and stretches his arms outstretched; then he presses firmly with his palm, and it returns; then he places it under the anvil, and holds it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	il leu lact.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And then they are brought back to the shoulder joint, when it is detached from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Separate it is dislocated only because of two actions: firstly, the dislocation occurs from the shoulder blade to its bottom part; and secondly, it happens to the top part. And occasionally it may be dislocated above, which rarely occurs.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it is not dislocated backwards behind the shoulder or inside the nerves; and more often it is dislocated downwards towards the shoulder blade, mainly among those with little strength, because they jump hastily. Among those with sufficient strength, it jumps to arms and returns to arms.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it may also happen in some cases due to impact or cracking, and the shoulder swells with a popping sound, and they believe that it is dislocated by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must try to do it, as long as you are certain; and then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And is known when it goes towards the shoulder blade, and makes a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest differences between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and underneayer the top of the shoulder as if it were an egg; and the sick one cannot bring its hand back to its neck, nor move from any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, because you see it clearly at the top.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this type of dislocation is not just about returning the shoulder to its place when it's new or if there's great pain and misalignment in the limb.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is that the physician lifts the sick hand at the top of the shoulder first, then moves it around underneath the blade and lifts the joint up to its original position forcefully; and the physician lifts the hand again, extending it above; if done suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it doesn't come to pass as we have said in the past days, then it is required that the sick shoulder be soaked in warm water. The physician must also arrange it gently with softening and soothing methods, similar to a decoction of honey and fenugreek in warm water, and treat it;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the sick shoulder is pressed against its back and a piece of linen equal to one foot in size is placed on the shoulder blade. It shouldn't be too soft or too hard, then the thumbs are put under the linen, lifting it gently at the top of the shoulder, treating the displaced joint carefully, and pull back the sick hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And other physicians may also pull the top of the sick shoulder if it doesn't move downwards. The dislocated shoulder returns now, and you see if they do so in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	saufilicre.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other attendants remove the hand of the sick man towards his abdomen. And if the sick man's arm is too heavy, he does not hold anything heavy with it, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the resetting is done in another way as well: and it is a long stick placed in the ground, so that the dislocated joints are also moved like a shepherd's crook, and not too large nor too slender.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is placed upon the sick man's body but with soft pressure on his shoulders, and the dislocated joints are long limbs; then the hand is extended to another direction, and the joint returns quickly to its original position.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return by these methods that we have mentioned, then this treatment is made with an iron rod of two arms long and four fingers wide at the top to be inserted into a hole in the assegai according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then he places the iron rod on top of the softened limb so that it does not injure the sick man, and puts it inside the assegai's hole in the dislocated limb; then extends his arms along the long part of the iron rod, placing the splint there, and at the head of the arm he places the splint, and puts a wide shaft under one of the handles of an oar that is broad, and stretches out the hands backward, and let the heart hang down in another direction; now the dislocation returns to its proper place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it happens, in whatever manner it may be, you must place on the assegai's hole a spindle of wool, then apply to the splint some powder made from millstone (likely referring to medicinal herbs), with incense and olive oil applied all over the shoulder and chest area, then stretch out the splint around the dislocated joint, turn back the splint on top of the powdered splint, embrace the hand in his collar, and leave the hands hanging down so.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is required that you massage the area regularly until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then continue to massage after about five or six weeks, move the joint again, and if it remains firm and not soft, then it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the dislocation is strong due to moisture or any other reason, it requires that you administer cupping treatments for three punctures, as it would be done by an actual physician.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	Et encize de laisseur :maelle apres les cheveille, as coloppeit out of the áscezue :sanspeise de laissime lexpressed in English on itmejourre:0ns. It'ses'sainute:r.iellatn: 12 :dé:old.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation towards the shoulder and the thighs, where it is caused by a push or extension of hands, and applied to another area; and treat it until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes injured again with subsequent movements, then it uses many times that painful bath until the dislocation is relieved to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the double dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Cutting that the double joint is pulled and pulls back; it has been pulled from all parts, mainly in front and behind, and the dislocations are not restored because one can clearly see and feel them; and they are displaced according to each case.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the painful joint with the healthy one, if it allows to see openly; for the dislocated joint is stiff and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you set it back again as soon as possible when the skin begins to peel off, because if the skin starts to peel away, it would be very difficult to return; and perhaps not even all of it can be returned, especially since it is at the rear; and this dislocation is worse than others in terms of pain, and sometimes this injury leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be returned such as it were; extend your hand to its two hands; and spread his arms, and look at the joints of each finger according to their cost, both above and below, and bind the dislocation together in one place, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its natural position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to its own hand, and proud of the root of the cost that has been displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	:esme : Aupon laisse, oun.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the physician joins the joint in the hand, if he does not anoint it with any oil to smooth the joint, then forcefully sets the joint, so that it returns properly as long as it recoils.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, if she places it on a wooden frame with woolen coverings, and straightens the limb, and holds down the arm at the malady spot, and lets it rest for some days, then releases it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, loosen it and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then restart the frame and the limb, and leave it for some days until it is securely set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels cramped after the return of the limb's position, and it becomes stiff, bathe and rub it well, until it is relaxed; or you place a warm cloth on the joint, leaving it for one day and one night, then let the physician decide whether to give a bath or not.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, rubbing the joint continuously, then replace the warm cloth, and decide whether to give a bath or not, doing this several times, until it is healed; and if you see, place fine moistened cloth with sheep's wool over it, and straighten the limb; if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand.
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand joint is displaced, and its return is light compared to other joints so far; it must be brought back to place immediately, in our way that it returns displaced, or whether it causes an abscess to form under pressure.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the return if you place the malady hand on a table, extend your ministers' hands, and make them hold it equally, so that he places his palm in front of the joint, and presses until it recoils.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Always, it is required that you check if it returns to its original position; therefore, place the patient's malady hand on a table with extension and return movements.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's malady hand on a table, and make him raise his hand to the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the stretching of frames calming abscesses occurs, let it continue in this way until you decide to try again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot endure, and you are not able to put it back in position after some days, then the joint remains twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and you know not that the patient's hands are softened, and cannot do anything at all: therefore, you understand that it is perforated veins or arteries; for no other treatment exists except to draw blood from near the swelling by cautery.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are on the grounding piece, as we have said before, then strain and let it rest for a while, then loosen and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well and there is no crack, then apply the water of fire heating, and rub until it becomes sound.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the shoulder joints.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	There has never been the shoulder joint dislocation to any part of the hand, neither on the back of the palm nor on the abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then it is the shoulder joints and reset the dislocation into your pockets as long as it relaxes, then support the head of the two shoulders, and move them towards the part where they are joined.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it rest for two years, and then set it again, as we have said before, and loosen it day by day, and make it move, and reconnect it, and do this often until it is tight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same with it if dislocated to the abdomen of the hand, and make it as you have done before until it becomes sound, and do the same if dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Double shoulder dislocation.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When both the shoulders or the neck are dislocated, there may be many of them if there is no treatment, because death hastens the patient with such maladies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that he voluntarily makes a stance that he cannot hold, and many times become weakened with no member holding firmly, or the two hands or both arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the hip joint moves with four parts; that which moves in back is called "gilbo-osteosis."
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that if the "gilbo-osteosis" comes in childhood, there has been no cure nor recovery for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which falls or is struck by blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment have said by great words, and they do not gain much advantage in all this.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have applied it according to my intention, and have formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that the "gilbo-osteosis" which does not heal well in the flesh.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also this one that comes directly to two corners, and cannot be cured by the feet which come from behind, as I have said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient's painful parts are stretched over his face in one level, and have no strain on them so they do not break;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then place a straw in the ground shaped like the chief, and another for the legs, and bind a band around the openings between the sores of the patient, and another for the joints, and the thighs, and the knees;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and divide them into two groups, one to the straw in the ground and the other to the legs among the same straws;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the straw as we have said, and put his palms on the shaped spine so that it regains;
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not improve with this treatment, then take a cradle of two arms long, and fasten on the side where it appears, and put the painful part to the side, and place the chief of the cradle under the shaped spine, then lay the cover of the cradle over the shaped spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and put his legs on the other chief of the cradle, and press well so that it regains at the place; if you see, then let him turn the wheel by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	and place two straws under the painful part with one arm long, and to each of these other two straws, put between them a hand span away from each other.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and in each straw place one hole or the wheel turns therein, and make them firmly in the ground so they do not move; between these two straws, place another turning straw, so that when the wheels turn, they can turn it, and have in two-and-a bonny little straws of a hand span long, for turning the wheel.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then bind the band among the openings of the wheel towards the chief straws, and another bond to the other two straws at the opposite wheel, and each minister turns his wheel around the whole band equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equalized, then place a drying agent with some oil on the openings of straws and fire brands, and then the healing tablet of two feet long, which cleans the back part of the patient's spine and healthy joint from corrosion, and bind it together as we have said, and use the painful parts with subtle grumbling until they are well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing happens at the end of healing, then it is required to administer mild and soft medicines with the tablet that we have said before; and never once administer a lump.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and there is no appearance in the back part of the spine at the back of the patient's body, and one should be cautious that it may be dislocations; for by reason of this bone appearing, we must not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	hip dislocations.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	:comme les poincts ence neuf.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocation within such that when joining the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens wider than the healthy joints, and he cannot double his knee cap with fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And is the leg which lies near the incision hot, for that the joints of the hip come out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who it happens to him, this accident is contrary to these beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who it happens to him beforehand, for they are well with their leg according to completion; altogether, he does not double his knee cap with pain, and if one tries to make him move, he cannot do so, and retains urine, and swells the angel, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who it happens to him behind, for he cannot expand his knee cap and double, and that leg is more tore than the other, and the angel is softened, and the hip joints are at the base of the flanks.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The return of this resemblance of dislocation is that the dislocation was already there, and it takes according to its arrangement, where there is no treatment; and it does not require any presumption on our part.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of four types of dislocation, if you quickly turn the joint back to its place, and put it inside and outward, and the movement goes to the right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it requires one of the strongest ministers, and you must hold the leg strongly with two or three straps that are tied above the knee cap;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other ministers extend their hand in part so that they push down on the patient'gon soles, then they squeeze with a strap above the hip joint; and others hold the head of the strap.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the sick person is raised off the ground once, and then left hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to these four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned in this manner, it is quite well as we have said.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If that is not so, then it requires treatment for its type. When the dislocation is at the base of the hip, it must be supported on the patient's side, then a strap above the root of the hip joint, and the strap below the angle of the hip, and then they are placed high towards the hip joint, and towards the muscle.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then another ministers their arms, and hug the large part of the sick hip joint, and extend it backwards to its original form: if it returns now to its place; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot huddle it in this manner as we have said, then it must be tied together with a strong strap on both feet of the sick person, and above his knees, and the other injured leg is extended more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	:comence aspeakre non-leu salle morcegustraie dexin thegere injuscript in theitens oun:nonnent. Theobserve ofr ittractsouller,later, lor. I'mons fromme:er lacte a mandeur (thewoman. Itteletre lege fromenturea frommaltois. Fromteri10x: ​eat deit incisiveyte,sic: theorelvesse tocause.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is to be set, if it causes great pain as we have said in that which has bumps on the malformed leg, and straighten firstly the misaligned part of the leg itself, and also the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place some heated irons on top of the head and other parts of the limb inside the malformed leg, then insert a hot iron between the joints to restore its shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and plant it on wet linens to prevent the malformed limb from bleeding, then extend each muscle towards him, and he places an equal amount of dislocation in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that is good. But if not, place it on a flat surface and press it in the same way as we have said for the bumps on the malformed leg, and apply pressure to the healthy side of the injured limb.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is present, it must quickly extend the malformed leg and according to what I have said; put his hand on the painful spot above the malformed area, then press with the other hand towards the groin below the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And when the dislocation is set, it does not need to extend the malformed leg forward or lift it up on the ground, but rather keep it in a similar position as if we have described how to lie down after a dislocated elbow;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and stretch it over his chest, and the leg is extended as we have described before, and it must be pressed on the joint to the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and when the painful limbs are extended to be equal in length, then adjust the kneecaps, and place a brace on it, and tighten the bandage so that the elbow does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and if it rests for two or three years, then release it, and place the brace on it; if you see that they are equal in length, tighten as before, and let it stay for three years; then remove the brace, and allow the limb to move freely, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	concerning the elbow dislocation.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joints are dislocated according to three ways: that is, in and out, and backwards, but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the kneecap, and if it does not touch the kneecap, you know that he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit right, extend his leg if possible, place your back on his kneecap, and put him on his feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his elbow with your palms, and pull between your arms, then bend the two sides of the elbow joint properly; and another minister extends the patient's leg until the joint returns to its original position, and signs that he can move his kneecap easily.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and apply the bandage to the kneecap, and let the leg be straight for two or three years, then release it; and do not make the malformed limb move as long as the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the malformed hand is not toge, et quant les .iij.revele ices les evesque li a malaides plores: "O"mantree aultres enceins que n'tous la tels quelses. Iliau devisible entouren leaiclaurainces demeans :sures, et il. Leu itaims toire andreisle meats. I'er thetistrom aureges aoutilite: "baldin.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The toes are never fully dislocated, and they return quickly afterward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs indicate that the knee is inflamed, and attempts should be made before the part where it has dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The return of the reset should be done quickly, and one must extend their hands quickly only when they are dislocated:
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is fully dislocated, it must be that the patient lies down straight, and they are given .i. ministers (medicine) by mouth, above the ankle of the leg:
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then carry it with you in your right hand, and then again in the left for two times, then lift it up, and let the medicine flow down from the upper part:
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this two times as we have said, while stirring the medicine and carrying it; if it returns, that's good. If not, since it returns again, repeat the procedure:
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return in this way, then have the patient sit on his back on the ground, and firmly insert .i. stick (a type of splint) between his legs, and cover him with a blanket so that he does not injure himself:
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then put the medicine on his thigh, and apply another medicine either to your hands or to a strip that you tie underneits of the poultice:
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then stretch each medicine evenly, and place the stick between the thighs of the patient to hold him back when you lift him:
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the medicine evenly on his hands, and apply another medicine to the healthy leg above the dislocation, and it will return soon:
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the right point, put the poultice and stick on top of it, stretch it out, and wrap the stick under the leg, warning those who are above the ankle not to make the rope too tight:
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three years if the rope loosens, and then remove it after one year or quarter, allowing the dislocated limb to return gradually over four years:
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if this does not last until the end term, it is still safe that it hasn't dislocated again yet.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears on the arse comes up, it must be that you soothe him, as we have said elsewhere, as long as he is healthy.
des dois	From thereon:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the dislocations are present, they must be extended slowly and steadily with minimal effort; it is a simple thing: This reflects an early understanding of joint realignment where gentle manipulation was emphasized over forceful methods, aligning somewhat with current medical advice on handling dislocations.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in no part of the body, it must be that you place the patient on one flat surface or on an entire table straight, and put your poultice over those joints which open up, pressing firmly until they return. This advice appears to align with a rudimentary method for treating dislocations where the limb is positioned in such a way that it can be naturally realigned: In this context, one flat surface (presumably meantime table in ancient practice and medicine prescribe by ailments as noses in .i.e.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	sesjèrre ajustre desk :eraièl’aissèlater.iage, theese andurge,lescripture.alere ofx'sisjour 2ere.ère:seer. Alligives it:ère:respectsage.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation and one attempts to restore it, many times the misery leads to death.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you know little of the art and have used it for a short time, and if you are humble and merciful and do not rush - then be not bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of calming measures apply cold, and leave it to God for the patient if there is no hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then straightaway reposition the limb to its place so that the joints become loose.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is set in place, if you apply calming measures and care for the wound as it requires, with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is a break due to the dislocation and small bones are displaced, and handle the bones and do as we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And keep from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is by your creator's will and for the sake of your preparation and courage. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The full phrase in physics: The art of healing (medical practice).
