O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear children, I have accomplished this book which is the tail of the knowledge of medicine, including the completion of its presentation and through its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision I came to know that I completed this treatise with this particular work, which is part of the whole body of surgery, namely "cryotherapy".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the handwork is well established in our region and it's widespread everywhere, if that were true then science would suffer and collapse, and there are no delays for these injuries described in the small books written by hands long ago.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the mistake and arrogance, understandings were closed, and knowledge became distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or I seem to revive this treatise altogether in accordance with the method of presentation and declaration and abbreviation; and together I will present the forms of instruments used for cauterization and other tools from the medical work along with the alignment of its declarations and preparations, as it is a necessity.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has been elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is required that those who enter into the science of anatomy should know, as Galen says, to the extent they understand the proper functions and forms of organs, joints, separations, bones, nerves, muscles, the number of limbs, movements, and their resting states, and also have knowledge of blood circulation, its origin and flow.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And as Hippocrates said that it is not much without the knowledge, and with this work little can be done; hence in the art of manual practices I am putting emphasis on.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are acquainted with it, so that they do not commit errors and do not touch themes; and Iundefine medicine.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	nure. I:ne: Whatsoverle meile. ceteral andrometation of thepeace, Celtic vene, aire. Erean ouses : The inecartiou:squelet juice (fie :ramine.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And sees another eye doctor who cuts a man's wound with a large knife, and the wound was great; he took away from him a piece of the bladder, and for two years he died.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and I knew that if he continued to be in pain there, he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor in our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had an open wound; the physician kept holding the fracture on top of the wound by very strong force, and allowed no salve to come into the wound at all, and commanded him not to remove it for any reason; and stayed in such a state that his leg became completely deformed and his knee joint came to its end, leading to his death.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come and he urgently needed his leg released; when I saw him after freeing the leg, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways of his illness had already been confirmed or related to a limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who collapsed under an incurable abscess, and then he became inflamed due to the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre that is filled with black bile does not need to be touched with iron if it is in part unhealed, as it can only remove what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, you need to know that work done by hand is divided into two parts: it is as follows, the head or neck where there is danger in several positions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For that reason you need to be careful so that the ignorant doctor does not speak ill of your work.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in defense, and perform your harmful treatments lightly but firmly, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you may be saved and honored; and leave curable diseases to grievous healing; and wield your weapons so that no one doubts you, and act as if it is from this world that you will come into the other for glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	The French physician Galien made no such admonitions: "Do not treat any disease poorly that you may not be called the foolish doctor."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this subject into two chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cupping and bloodletting therapes, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of punctures, and types of cupping, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and dissection, and blisters and wounds, extraction of arrows, and the resembling things; it is ordered and the forms of punctures.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it orders the chiefly located here as well as the forms of joints.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So it is that our memories of the past tell us that I must declare the quality and harm caused by each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality and harm are longer words and subtle science and secret replies; and from this talk others of wounds agree with it, and they accept it little because I fear its length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire aid universally to all conditions in which there is material, for example such conditions as a warm body with matter, and dry body with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the combination of warm and dry matter, no one agreed and they said that fire is great help; while others said the opposite: that fire is only helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is warm and it should not be used as a remedy for diseases caused by heat or dryness; this was said by those who said the opposite, that fire helps greatly with hot and dry illnesses brought about in people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the body's constitution and its moisture to that of fire, you will find the body's surface warmed.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it none by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all respects, we dare not venture except those who have experienced the mastery of cauteries and know well the diversity of human constitutions, their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and remedies and intervals of a hundred days; for us, others do not worry, mainly with cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all those who are great gathered together and agreed on cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And you must know that fire together with heat is the secret of many remedies, and greater benefit than burning medicinal plants.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not harm except to the member that is hot and dry, and it hurts no other part of the body little.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Medicines that come from another part of the body and bring forth disease from it.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	nature. Ai leu thewaxes. Leu. Thefy alafie lautume:age d'suforent. What iax. Ameet. Ina, andire, andre. Iaccomprehte. Andrescaur:
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	lume.amine. Lxseille.t : thexime uniaxe.naggesse tolngardeceuxeves.dents [entire apectiludecessekleuximeuranture ightheable that:sufre
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you know, son, how they agree in that moment when the cauteries should be done and the instruments are prepared.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that caustication is agreeable in all cases, because the suffering caused by aided caustication lies deep within the cautery; and mainly when the cauteries are necessary for painful or urgent conditions that cannot wait any longer than what greater malice does not strike at the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you never think, dear son, how the wise man acts; for to a disease cured by caustication there is no return; and they say so in this way: but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes complexion, nor do they dry up the humors which cause pain, rather their value lies more in hastening recovery and demonstrating the virtue of its work.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there is no case where the disease's appearance or its nature and virtue remains unchanged; and in it are gathered superfluous elements through the acquisition of meats and similar things - unless cauteries were administered, which would mean little excess and moisture present, as with caustications for pain relief, and little to no return of pain. But this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many do not understand why caustications are called the 'legs of medicine,' but that's to see; yet they don't believe that caustications follow medicine - their understanding is false, and it calls caustication the legs of medicine because in no malady do we administer all types of treatments and none of them deserve cauterization, so we use cautery when necessary. It has value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Although caustication is called the 'legs of medicine,' it's not according to the wise men's understanding.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old said that caustications made with gold instruments are more effective than those made of iron and they spoke not of the foolishness but rather the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; and they said that the cautery's leather does not fall apart, but I have seen it myself, and found in some cases it is true. However, caustications made with gold are more valuable than those made with iron, just as the old said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in all cases where you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know exactly how it heats due to the color of the gold, and if it suddenly cools down; and when overheated, they burn at the fire; and this is enough difficulty.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use iron caustication because it has appeared to be useful in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter by the main points here, so that it can be found more easily.
dou cautere olivaire	double caustication (caustication with two applications of the instrument)
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These caustications are hot and cold to the brain, and in them two causes have fallen from the chiefly ears: many dreams and pain of density and throat and chills and mostly for all diseases that come from coldness so paralysis and stroke and ailments.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	I'taille, aims and aitin: lesely an olden laineaux:décaustrains lailain theaure it isenteraise and in itale, itandre, aicarellabsol, eresculature develle il.faire oficharde,s.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then the knife should lie between your hands, and put his hands on the skin; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his thigh between its two legs; and if blood comes up, then wipe with the cautery called "olivare", for thus it is shaped:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put ink on the edge of the wound, and draw your finger up and out little by little, tearing apart; then let your hand lie idle, and reward the edge as soon as you see a small bone .i. fragment; and if not, repeat using cautery until you see the bone ..ii fragments; after that put some thread in moist cotton, and lay it on the wound, and leave for two years; then treat the ulcer called "tetrapharmacia", so long as it is sound.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said the ancient one that the longer you press on the wound, the more it cleanses; and for this reason it helps heal faster.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that the cautery must be used so lazily that part of the bone is left unburned, and then reapply to the charred bone, treating it afterward.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other advice is that one must apply cautery lightly, and hit so hard with it that the bone becomes as wide as a button women place in their brasses for the purpose that fluids may rise out of it; you should leave the wound open-air exposed for an extended period. Only afterward can proper treatment begin.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to be equally effective in all cases; except for those who have never felt fear (fears) before; I believe that we should leave them as they are, because the shoulder joints become weakened over time due to continuous exposure to various solutions, a fact we can observe in other members of our body; and considering my patient'e malformed shoulders naturally suffer from this condition, so for the initial use of cautery I prefer it to be more gentle and gradual, and since using it thus results in relief, that is the approach I choose.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	And this pain from the chief (main cause) refers to a deep ulcer that requires treatment.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	s :en:
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Beware the shoulder blade of the sick person is naturally strong, and it should not be too cold; however, cauterize around that area a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization on each horn of the skull where we have said before, and make a little cautery there; and it is that the blades are called "vasselz"; and raise your hand so you do not see the bone directly: the sick person feels much more intense pain in this cauterization than from others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and let the cauterization of the horns be less noticeable than that which is done on most heads, and its shape is as follows:
dou cautere dou chief	double cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	If in one part of the head there comes sudden severe pain, and the illness extends to the body, and the shoulder blade is eased by universally used medicines, and all other treatments I mentioned for disease divisions have not provided relief; however, let us cauterize according to two methods, which are medicine and iron:
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine fire should be preceded by a dressing; and remove the skin and scrape this few times as two blades, and then make the temple where the pain holds part of it in such a way that you can reapply the dressing on the skin underneinaside the bandage; and if it has been restored well, let it remain so for 10 to 12 hours; and then loosen and treat wounds with the medicine cautery, and leave the wound in this state for two or three years; and then put on cotton padding dipped in bran as much as you need.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cauterization has healed, and if you see that there are any other burning medicines I have written about orally delivered cautery medicines:
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the iron cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head resembles a clover or has a small shape; with few corruptions, and in appearance, placed on the painful area; and you put your hand on it slightly and restoratively move it somewhat laterally until most of the blood flow stops; then lighten your hand so that the arrow does not burn, but remains loose, allowing an abundance of fluid to drain.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying linen on the wound and placing it for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in cloth and treat the ulcer until it heals completely; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the instrument called "cultella," at all points of its tip, but be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	from the ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing an ulcer as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn't improve without treatment; however, it is necessary for you to heat the "cultella" until it is white; then draw a line on the affected area half a dozen fingers long, press your hand once, and stretch so that you do not cover the artery and ensure that it does not move with the bone or cause spasm in the muscle. Be cautious of mandible paralysis when speaking, and make sure the nerves have no movement causing tremors in the patient; be careful about the drainage of fluid from the artery after it has been drained, or if there is a significant fear that affects both patients who are not students and practitioners. Allow the work to proceed; but I will tell you how one manages sanguine discharge when the arrow is coppered in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this instrument does not alleviate the illness and the patient suffers, cauterize it on both sides as we have said; treat the wound until it is healed; and if you observe, administer the "cultella" or surgeon's extractor of the artery with a pair of scalpels. These instruments are better than others in terms of effectiveness.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from cold earache pain
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from the ear comes and takes of healing medicines and treatments that we have discussed in its form. Illibris .ixemale leude, et leu dolores et siete en iaudrement en maundre depeints cest la, lorce illobeautources d'armes apeel of thex it:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the point of pain in the malicious ear, or when both sides hold pain, and move it slightly away from the root of the ear; then touch each ear twenty times; afterward heal the wound until it is sound.
de la torture de la bouche	The text appears to reference "the torment of the mouth," possibly referring to some form of pain relief or treatment technique used in medieval times for ailments involving the mouth, potentially related to dental issues or throat discomfort.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The treatment using torture with a hot iron should be limited to those diseases that involve phlegm, as we have mentioned in the sections of disease; and it must not include similar treatments involving vomitus or pus.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torture for diseases involving earwax and regurgitation from the mouth, as well as gargling, it must then require that you perform three cauterizations on the malady: one at the root of the ear, another slightly away from the temple, and a third in the alignment of both jaws; place the hot iron there where it opens up, above just beneath the prominent part of the ear, and another further out towards the temple as if with pliers; leave the heated instrument until the bleeding stops; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the kind of cutlass we have shown you, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after treating the wound as I have previously mentioned, until it is sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, it will not benefit the patient at all, nor will they have fever; however, you must perform four cauterizations: two under the prominent parts of the ears, one pulling back the ear lobe, and another called "vassels" (probably referring to a specific tool or technique) as we have previously mentioned, along with a caustic treatment on the stomach floor; you must treat it in the manner we have previously described.
de litargie	The text refers to "litharge," which is an ancient term for lead(II) oxide, historically used as a pigment and medicinally to treat various conditions; however, it's essential to note that its use in modern times has been discontinued due to the health risks associated with heavy metals.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	Oncour espoituries: aulthe malice du seer treize, et l'aument.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	lange les entandrelet dcites.efteaulement.scele en time xile soignesse the lume.n iadeux clax ̄nde  absourndrevesse cosseurant:nissectherme:fasse,gerecte de riendectheveluconsecamebledevise'cellaire forsente a cenginjaccrone;tituive.dongredemainat : theancheletcribe  better thaten in whichesherifferisso l’arande to crainscius andecie,sgermeaut
de la froidor dou chief	Of cold steel, direct the leader to let his hair grow long and even; if they prick at their roots, hold them firm so they do not move until born.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the leader be instructed in years and all that we have mentioned before; after which he treated the sick headman, then pierced him with fire beneath each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more skill, and his hair is damp and his malady suffering, and the disease is serious, then pierce four times under the backbone of the ribs; afterwards let him rest until he regains strength, and caress with your hand; after that cure him until he becomes well, and perform the "olivare" as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	From the epilepsy, it is required that he rest until his strength returns; then with gentle caresses soothe him, and cure him completely until fully healthy; perform the "olivare" as we have previously indicated to treat this condition.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use forceful caustic fire on those who are phlegmatic, and it is required to first educate the brain in years of cures that we have mentioned for when the malady is great and suffering from medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure the treatment, he made gargling and chewing to educate the brain often with bones or meats; after that, he treated the headman in a medium state, and then did one caustic according to what we have said before, and one under each horn; and if his malady is serious and suffering, then do the caustics as I have previously indicated for someone who has paralysis and limb flaccidity, on the backbone of the spine and collarbone, and perform the "olivier" according to the manner we have previously described (translation).
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the malady is an infant, then he made one subtle caustic according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the causes of melancholy are excess or damp and heavy phlegm, as we have said to that individual who has paralysis (translation).
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy are excess and declining toward melancholy, and his malady-afflicted head is moist, then he must drink something to soothe it, as we have mentioned before in this division (translation).
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	: iltefaire taille icycles:esmeat, theil, lege,secrete, anderaire lice.cei :entire: sejourre.a :get aurofairte. Inigo.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points throughout the caustic. This method of cautery softens the brain greatly; and then place a cloth dampened in linen and lamb's fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	From the fear of the eyes.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the fear comes first with signs that I mentioned in the division, and it begins, and then boils up from within the patient's head, and protects against all moisture, and bleeds or bathes many times without food.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to retrace his chief, and he performs cautery on the chief, and he makes .ij. cauteries under .ij. temples wherein the patient's fear is concentrated in the .ij. eyelids, or one at a time; and with all the cauterization he closes veins and arteries located around the keel, along the length of its breadth on the temple; and to prevent drainage of blood, if you see too much blood oozing out, then lance it accordingly.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision with which to discharge it as you deem appropriate; and never is there done a cauterization or excision under the .ij. bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The courses of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears are old and customary ones that flow with the veins or near the arteries visible on the surface of the head: one caustic to the chief, and two caustics under the temples, and two caustics beneath the bones; and if it has need more, then cauterize him above the scalp.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The veins of the chief des cauteries des vrai: develi en l'encontre les taille of l’an.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, for giving a malady three bite dogs; after the king's chief, and he made fire-cauteries of about one hundred fire-cuttings on the shoulder joints, and did two cauterizations called "clavicles" under each artery, but a little above the veins; and you must warn him of the artery so that it does not get covered.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form called "clavicle":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, and therefore the fire-cauterization of this type which is called "olivaire": for as such it is.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you make two cauterizations under each vein as the veins themselves are long and even; and do not let go of your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to what I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair which does not touch the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There never happens that the hair of oils is converted into paste, and they hold onto the oil, and it's done by fire-cauterization according to two methods: namely burning or using hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or fire-cauterization instructs the patient that he let his hair remain long and uneven while holding their base; and if they prick at their roots, he keeps them still until they grow fully.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and become uneven, then the physician places him on his health; after which he writes a figure similar to how one would draw flames near the hair roots, or make the beginning of a sign next to them; then he puts cotton wool moistened with ointment and musk under the oil, and covers this fire-cauterization as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the fire-cauterization of the sign you made little and little many times, that the cut should be at this place; and the signs of health are when you see the paper retracted, and the hair lifted to the heel of the oil; therefore lift your hand, and leave it for two years, then put cotton moistened with wax there, until the caustic is dissolved. Afterward perform a salve application so that it is healthy again.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs come again and their paper is softened, so as you did in your first method; and when they are long, or cauterize until the paper raised naturally, and hold them still oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fiery cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment shaped like the leaf of myrtle; take frankincense and lye in equal parts, grind them together well; apply quickly so it does not freeze, then sprinkle on the shape you made with the myrtle leaf, and place the hairs on top of that paper; and if the illness is due to only one oil, then work on it accordingly, and in both cases as well; put cotton wool moistened in pure water above the site; and let the shoulder joint be healthy and show your treatment on its surface, and press a little bit every time the patient feels an irritation from the medicine, for he feels discomfort too like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have done this for a long time, then let the medicine take effect on your need.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the irritation from the medicine is passed, raise the limb again, and reward yourself seeing the paper raised as it was lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, that is well. If not, then still apply medicine on the limb or the medicine has not yet worked, until your operations are equal, and your hairs put in order; then place cotton wool moistened in toughen cloth over the arrows which are called "dyafenis", and other things, so long as it remains healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you know well that you must care for your work with great care so it does not spit out the hairs from the medicine. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs stick in the oil, then repeat the medicine on those limbs which are made soft by the paper properly as you did before; afterwards cure them until they are healthy; and that is the form of myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And be aware that the men are of various sizes and shapes, and according to this you should not repeat the right path on the one who studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cauterization.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is required that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your healthy state; and hold his head between your hands so that it does not move or make a noise, after placing cotton moistened with olive oil or olive juice on the arrows (called "dyafenis") under the oil; then heat up the cauterization which is half-done: and if you see that his head is like a pillar of a vault, make sure the cauterization touches both heads equally; if so seen, it may have an ink spot from one to another, and if you see it, then it is as though there is a tent; but all this is worth much for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	La parchemin, et la vraye d'Acheliers desor les cheveaux deffacez quator ceufes desorme:combe mevele aage. Aidons: oulder veau.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come at the beginning of this cautery on the bone, it would be better. But if not, if it still uses the cautery again once, and if you know how to do so, and let it for 3 years; afterwards he wraps a moistened linen in woollen cloth, and treats the desiccating ointment on his bone until it is healthy, and after 40 days when it is not yet healthy, he puts medicine corrosive so that the bone becomes exposed; and let the king do as he came to this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of cautery for abscesses that none of the ancient ones said. Regarding an abscess, and cutting its head; afterwards he puts in the small cavity under it a needle of fine steel with this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make the quantity of about .з. (presumably meant to be "de" in old French) pieces; and hold your needle firmly in hand, so that the molten metal does not move at all until it is poured into its oil; and it must put it into the oil for the abscess wound with moistened linen wrapped in clean cloth or in a hollow of sheepskin, because the piece shapes the head of the fistula, and gives very good healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the abscess is healthy with the cautery we have mentioned before, that's good. But if not, it must administer a puncture to the vein, and bring back the fistula to its course according to what needs to be done in each particular case.
des crevaices en levres	and cavities in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, these cavities in the lips have been called "poils" (which seems to be an error or misinterpretation), and most especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cavities as we have described in our divisions, the treatment does not benefit at all; instead, it must use a small cultural cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it must be applied immediately to those cavities while they are still in the shape of their formation; after curing, the surface of the corium (the inner lining) is treated until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the incision on the abdomen
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	: Ivorne (written in the wholeme escrire old French: encien :torjour : ices. It'sescribe leu :sans a itorentro to : lesseuran and torrespective, cure of France, ceasing.titharre.
dou movement des dens	About fire cautery, command the patient to let their hair grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them so they do not move until birth.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, you treat them with medicines which is not effective, then put the chief molar back in its healthy state; after using the cautery for which it will come shortly afterwards in a manner similar to placing a cane on the tooth; and quickly heat within the cautery, and hold your hand as much as possible so that the patient feels the hot air coming from the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the molar with dirty water, awaits an hour and hardens splinters.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gum remains restricted, and the corrupted moisturizers decay.
de la dolor des dens	In this instruction, we are focusing again on a description from an ancient medical text involving treatments for dental issues with fire cautery—an early form of thermal therapy used in dentistry to manage oral inflammation and pain associated with teeth. The passage describes the intended outcomes such as limiting gum swelling, curing decayed moisturizers (presumably a reference to infected tissues), and treating a moving tooth that is likely symptomatic of deeper dental pathology or infection.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	In this instruction, we continue to explore the ancient dental text and its descriptions of pain relief methods for teeth. The passage alludes to various causes of dental pain—suggesting cold sensitivity or infection as potential sources. It then contrasts these with medicinal treatments that seemingly proved ineffective, recommending thermal cautery using different materials such as bur wax and fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	In this passage from a medieval French text dated circa 13th century treatement of the fievre ales tow. Caucion:mein, and marye de cauter. The following transliteration desueture: The Vulgar, parcei :caus French :vocates iten français. In Old English translation in Old French (2000'sang, ahoraescription on Old Age 15thor French and English fornty in theold man, butter. Whatveinthe.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	screature. Thenesse. Anditpesima.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do fire cautery on the head of the shoulder you wish to treat, according to what you can. And it is the shape of a hook:
des scrophules	Of sores or ulcers.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophulae are of moist and cold nature, not responding to medicines, after which shape he will use two holes for letting out the fumes from one part; and he places fire under the abscess once, or twice as much, until it takes the form at the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, he uses cautery according to its size, and leaves it for three years; afterward, he covers it with moistened wool over burlap so that the pus has become bone-like, afterwards treating it with ointments and dressings until it becomes healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures defeat in channels of warm blood, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then you must first alleviate the maladies with curative medicines; afterward, he performs cautery at the root of the throat, and makes sure that nothing will come back to the throat, but only a little heat. Afterward, he performs another cautery at the union of the neck vertebrae in front of ours, where we have formed this kind before; and treat the area so as we have previously stated until it becomes healthy.
de la toust	from the stroke.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	All diseases of the pulmonary veins are moist and cold, and the maladies have no fever or shivering, it is an ancient disease; after that he performs two cauteries in the vein as usual; then another cautery on a piece between two nodes; and treat the area according to the form we described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, perform cauterization on the entire part called "pins" in front of the shape we have described here regarding ear disease; and treat these pins as many as 30 or more; afterward, treat the area according to what has been previously stated, and apply a second cautery on three veins according to this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauterization is lighter in that you do 3 for every 10.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the pain is felt on his back and along his ribs; after lifting up the area where there's tendernayer inside his chest cavity with your left hand, if the joint gets dislocated within that space, then use a cautery of .ij. degrees to shape it:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and burn the wound until it penetrates along his ribs, bringing together four .iiij. cauterizations; and therefore with this cautery of .iij. degrees, the cautery formation consists of six .iij. cauterizations, for which reason is that such a cautery has .iij. degrees, considering its subtlety like a tent'inas it takes shape:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And there is never applied to this particular nerve so that it has .viij. cauterizations:
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery with wire; after letting the patient rest, and not allowing his limbs to move much for long periods until he is well-confined:
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens; however, one must perform a cauterization on the thick cautery along the clavicle or with many punctures due to its joint being referred back to moisture and bone, as well as repositioning muscle. Support: Should there be an upward dislocation, only minor issues typically arise; however, it is necessary to carry out a series of cauterizations on the dense cautery along the clavicle or through numerous punctures since this joint returns to moisture and affects bone structure, necessitating muscle repositioning.
dou cautere de pleuresin	double cautery for pleurisy: Support: a two-pronged (or double) cauterization used in the treatment of pleurisy.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The olden texts stated that to treat pleurisy one must perform cauterizations of barley root, and if the largest you can find, dry it, and as long as they are wide; and with .ij. little incisions between the chest, and .ij.cteins de la coste de saillexen toile apearre deffense en peccole cauterizsescele doude la colere leffer: 'sansent'saint: Lefeu lice aireaute la tuitanorce lemeitout ofcorto.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And they said that no ancient used fire cautery as if a barber, and scrapes and places it between the sides, until he comes to the aposteme; and his pain leaps up, just as we have described in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear or so much pain that the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	The provided text fragment "de la mice" is not sufficient for translation into English without additional context. However, if we were to hypothesize its possible meaning based on French language structure:
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When curing the mouse disease that we have described in our treatises on division of treatments, and it does not yield any benefits at all; therefore, they employ three kinds of fire cautery that are considered good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One method is when you perform three or four cauteries, or three to four, according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the cautery used on the liver that we have previously mentioned in our writings. And do not bring your hand close to all the cauterization, but let it be applied mostly along the side of the painful abdomen;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cauterization is when you heat the cautery that has three or four notches, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lay it down where the mouse is located, or where the painful joint comes from to the left side, and elevate accordingly the heated area according to its size and position. And let the cautery be applied according to the width of the passageways within the body cavity.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After you have heated the three or four notches to make them visible from the opposite side, and then push the cautery through it, and so you will have performed it with three times; if you see that curing involves all parts of the cautery at the three notches. After the treatment when it has formed porridge for a long time, which is worth saying because these are part of the other treatments we have mentioned before.
de ydropisie	The phrase "de ydroisie" does not have a clear translation into English without additional context from the source material. However, based on its appearance in medical literature, it could relate to an outdated or regional term for 'edema' (swelling caused by excess fluid trapped in the body's tissues). In Old French, similar terms such as "goutte" might be used to describe edema conditions. Without more context, we can only speculate that this is a potential medical condition being discussed within the text related to treatments or observations made during medieval medicine practices.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	les liauere in the ásce. Theves:espeechs desird. Ivale lou esayer.aidreversa toknealtoast. Itiovreverbe itarmonars ake thebéan:era a. Thejacme'sescribe thecaisse
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cautery over it, let there be no falling for long distances, and do not abandon healing the sick person after the cautery; and recovery would take place, and they would become together two-fold with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be the collarbone we have shown before; and those for the back should be the ovary, according to what it has been placed there in front.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling in the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen due to ydcrypia (presumed typo for 'ydexica', which isn't a recognized term) and they appear yellowish with vitriol (citric acid), it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the finger between the ring and pinkie fingers; and move your hand gently while turning the cautery. And don't enter too deeply, otherwise there would be open wounds filled with yellow citrine, and you must carry out the cauterization according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing the same cauteries in each leg at the tip of the calcaneus (heel bone); and make one on the side of the knee before the groin and another behind, between the thighs; let the cauterizations be long enough for curing, so that it begins to heal; after treating other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the wound
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, to such an extent that the digestive virtues within the stomach and in the intestines are impaited (impeded), and it cannot be cured with any manner of treatments; and you see the sick person suffering greatly and being very strong, make one great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before or a cauterization on the stomach, so that the cautery circulates; and three small cauteries in each collarbone subtly, and three cauteries on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors (impacted feces) and the sick person suffering, then make one cautery on the navel, and one on each intestine; and three small cauteries in the stomach near to the large one, because the treatment is profitable as long as it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	If the hemorrhoids are founded androits (hemorrhoids; and they old and dierce: andarexpresse defface ofcree desperes (Old French. Itan : in Old french. 12th :itaccompagain, "during from the same year itawo :faithe taughed.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think his stomach is cooling down, and the meat does not cook, and we see the face swell up, therefore there must be a great cautery on top of the stomach, just as it has been described before, and another one on top of the liver, and another one over the belly with all the caustic needles; and let the cautery cover long enough. Afterwards heal the body until it is well again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of flesh-lust which is called "thelew".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope with flesh-lust, which is called "thelew", and it seems like a razor, then cover the whole area of "thelew" embers set; and let your hands be so long that the cautery's skin grows with the vein's birth, without cutting; do this once or twice or as often as we have said, and if there is much flesh-lust, then caution each part just as we have mentioned; afterwards treat with ointments until they are well again. And when you cauterize with a great cautery under the skin, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wounds.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the sick cannot bear to be dressed or covered, which we will tell in his presence, since there is a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no fistula, and it has grown old and fallen apart with moistened and decayed membranes, you should prove the entire tent subtilly, and put it into the fistula according to how much of the tent has entered, and cauterize as long as those porous and corrupt parts are being worked on, once or twice or three times depending on the quantity that is needed; and warn you about arising nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes into the body's cavity and intestines, then warn you of these things, and do not cause those fires in vain; after curing it until it is well again, and if its substance are bones long ways, so you know that the membrane is wholeheartedly healed. And if the substances are ossicles, and the bones have decayed, then you know that the membrane has been cut through; and in this way as one of those we will tell to him.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the frozen pain comes from rain and heavy winds, so it does not take much of a woman; therefore you must do cautery on both sides of the kidneys with one needle that we have mentioned before at the caustic knife; and if our cauterizations are done in this manner, there will be three needles in line, and then it will give more help.
de la vessie	of bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from moisture, so that the malaises retain urine, then make a caustic on the back of the bladder where they begin theirs blood, or two atailles cauterization one each side, and this one cauterization either if you need; ande li cauteries in the back.
de la marris	On thees sains tosturte doule, en la voie a meveil leu aurea:
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	gustre apexement.t commesse apeche,atoc raissexscre:ssex.
de la hainche	of the shoulder
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When moist substances descend into the joint of the shoulder, and for this reason it loses its position, and the signs are that the thigh becomes longer than the other when measured together; and they find the affected area in two departments above the joint of the shoulder, which requires you to cauterize the patient on the joint above the shoulder with a circular instrument like a caustic disk, and direct it towards the edge of the joint as if it turns within the circle, so that the joint is distributed within the circle; and if they cauterize thus as in the case of those who have been cauterized on their stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these caustic disks are not available to you, then make two large olivescauters and apply them in the same way as all other cauteries; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the shoulder
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the joint of the shoulder and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers greatly as we have mentioned in this division; therefore, you must purge the patient of these large humors with foul-smelling pills or other similar medications. This implies a historical approach wherein the treatment involves using specific remedinasions to address excess bodily fluids that are believed to be causing discomfort and pain in the shoulder area due to disharmony within the body's systems, as understood from medieval medical texts. It should be noted that such practices would not align with modern medicine but provide insight into historical healthcare methodologies.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After applying the caustic treatment; and the manner of this treatment is to be twofold according to what we have mentioned: namely medicinal pills with fire embedded in them, which are applied in various ways depending on certain methods. One method includes three triangular caustic disks that are deep and wide, spaced by a large distance between each disk, and some of these disks may be olive-shaped; no one ever applies the caustic treatment at the top of the shoulder joint for this reason, as it is applied in four distinct forms:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the caustic treatment is applied to the cautery disk in a manner where it covers the entire shoulder joint but also ensures uniform distribution of the caustic substance; this implies an innovative approach within medieval medical practices, potentially seeking to optimize the effectiveness and healing process by targeting all affected areas uniformly. However, without clear historical documentation or explicit reference in contemporary medical texts, these insights remain speculative interpretations based on fragmentary sources from the period:
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the manner that is done in cases of sciatica pain in the shoulder: and if the pain of the leg, tocauste de hainche, et seize le maladies siens :entence iau ons esse. Et s'sainctrois adn
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the art is mastered, he will do more; and if the pain lies on the side of the thigh towards the knee, then let him perform cauterization with a caustic or circular caustic well guarding in all his cauterizations so that the caustic does not burn too much the nerves and large arteries, and he does not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have performed cauterization on the ankle joint of the deceased man, and they let it be until his leg was completely healed, and even the ankle itself, which was also examined and corrupted in all its pieces after a stomach solution.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two joined parts, perform cauterization on one and on the other according to this manner. The surgeon said when performing caustic on the backbone, that's how it should be done, making .i. such iron and placing it either as big as a nutmeg or a little less, and either with interstices or between two stakes of about one foot apart in length; and they were placed over each other by .ij. parts, and also like nuts, and having made an iron hook well crafted; and that is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make it red and swollen, and then put it on the malignant hernial sac, and turn it out onto the sickly side of the backbone; and let the caustic be applied with .i. caustic twice more and leave for .ij. years; and then perform an embrocation and leave the wound exposed for over ten days after healing from the purging treatment.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucias said that we use this caustic very little for the patient's sake and if there were few who used it; but all in all, these are good caustics which he can bear and suffer less pain from them.
de la dolor dou dos	of double pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, from falling, percussion, too much evacuation, or resembling cold-expanded matter, none of these resemblances are worth caustic treatments because they come from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is after this that the malignant one is void of stinking pills or other resemblances, which are made on his back if the pain holds three lines signed from it, and in each line .i. caustics or more depending on virtue and quantity that he can bear; and do make the cauteries according to the caustic called "pointes"; and when you see, make .iij. pointes or .iiij. with this caustic shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they become constricted immediately when they lie down, and fear; and you turn in the back spine and in our appearance which appears above other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	Whenever you see it and you cure it, if you cauterize the cell according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the red cautery colors each part of the vertebrae equally; and when you see it, if you cauterize along the vertebrae to the points indicated by .iij., and place them close together. After curing it as we have said, and ensure that you do not use a glove filled with pus containing nerve filaments.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is due to moisture that spreads into each limb's core, and when it comes in a bent posture they call this "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be healed with medicines, then you must cure it through partial cauterization around the joint: apply enough cautery along the joint line, and arrange the caustic ox-horn in this manner.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you strike on the forehead of the body, and do cauterization with the whole caustic ox-horn called "point"; and when the pains wane in the joints and elsewhere, and this happens many times, then you cauterize each side of a joint with .iij. or .iiij. of every part, along the entire caustic ox-horn; and if you have to do more, but keep your hand off until the pain has subsided as much as it can be.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And when the pain descends to the hands and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its section; if it is in the hands, apply points along .ij. lines; and if there remains no pain at all, then apply points on each joint and also on the hair of the hand; and when the pains come to the wrists or hips, cauterize every part, and do good government over the malady and fever. For if you administer well and purge humors, it will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the surgical procedure
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	siens encela tole of thepeinche desuon frappe le mongre levele of ce. Ages of theesilver laisseur. If aulxor leis, anderel 140lore andere le cuitish-surname.entail,le,lesmeasumbre. Here decaustarture le4e:rise2ndentures and:n. Leprecisaurs without1escribe lesse laisse to theorre (fracture (soi
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Until they are white and tender to the touch. Then rub the wounds on their body; and let the ministers stain his hand so that it does not return arrows; and work well with the thighs of the patient, and place an iron and a sheath under them, and another piece of metal beneath which you burn the fingers; then apply the cautery to every part of your body, and hold the right and left side until the bone is touched, and if it is not touched in the first attempt, continue doing so as long as you feel the bone, for any further attempts; and warn subtly that the wound should not bleed when performing the cautery, or else harm the patient further.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless. It is required that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their size, and for large people also large according to their size; after three years treat the wound with a burnt caustic until it has scalded the bone; afterwards treat it with other ointments so long as it is healthy, and rest for forty days on his back until the wound is well sealed; and it is required that their movements be limited greatly, so that the wound does not reopen when they get up to go into rooms.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty years, when he wants to rise, he is fitted with a well-made leather band and worn for another forty years; and has good rest, that he works little and is warned against overeating and excessive eating, and high braying; and when he does this teaching, he is entirely cured. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	from abdominal routing
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When other routing procedures also exist and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then he makes one or two caustic burns according to their quantity, and about a third of the circumference; after this care as we have said before; and none of the ancients ever stated that it must be cauterized with a caustic at three angles in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the beginning of the incision and make one line above the routing for its width, and another beneath it; and put your hand in between all the burns with the caustic at the throat area. But the initial caustic burns are heavier and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	leu tolater aoutre: 'saint ce pasement laissezures la:i.tractslacturecité decaire la costume, theorce. Ake. ici andraises. Comment. Thewesentropy.
de meselerie	Of demonstration
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The cloth is never helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it cautioning this illness at the beginning, and treating it according to what we have said in the division, without hesitation or delay, for doubt arises whether the corruption will affect the whole body, but by using five cauteries on the head:
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the caustic is scattered everywhere; and it manifestly indicates that you must use these cauteries we have described:
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you understand that more caustic incontestance, et li maladies, et pres, et les cuisse nece: quant au œuvres en ains tote desires ais adresses messe ce l'a itg and apears laire de cauter. Ameas thewate meillanre quaterneighter. In English. Lepreacher lesage.
de enfleure	:saintoldesse:n:se,k. Andre apeople. Forceste (not: itchief:ticemental:gachief:e:secrease:3rdrawse cures:ment.faire:gaude.rengra.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When a swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not cured according to the size and greatness of the member; and so the firecauterization is slightly entered into the place most essential for curing, then he treats the wound with dressings until it becomes healthy. And there has never been a case where caustic treatment was done on hand or neck and back, at the point where the nerve makes the member silent, and thus such swelling is made of bone; and everything else does not intervene in no way unless known about limbs and moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	Unfortunately, there doesn't seem to be any text following "de albaras" for translation purposes. The given phrase appears to be a part of a larger context or another language entirely, which isn't provided here. Please provide additional information if you want the phrase translated.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	The disease called "albaras" is old and the medicine engine's value is nothing, but with a little firecauterization according to the size of the member, as long as the swelling becomes bone-like, then he treats it with flour and lentils mixed with olive oil and plantain leaves, and part by part blood from colon and blood from alder birds; and all melted together, and wrapped in a cloth, and tied to the wound until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of sores with firecauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the chancre appears at the beginning and you see to stop it, if you burn with the firecauterization which seems to be shaped like a circle around the entire chancre. Everyone who has treated sores with caustic also said that they did so in the middle of the chancre; but I don't think this is good because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never witnessed such a thing before; and the most correct course is to burn around it with the firecauterization called "circular," as we have said in many instances of cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The swelling that cannot die off.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some have a disease called "adubelati" and it delays dying or due to its excessiveness (meaning too much) and because of the illness when he is already decrepit, or for his thin skin; and you see that it will not die: however, burn around it with many small cauterizations by puncturing; afterward let it be. Because it will continue to delay dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see the swelling throughout all the cauterization, then you should heat the cauterization so that it takes on its form.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" so long as the cauterization has seen to it, and such cauterizations are done to the maladies of his feet in such a way that the course of pus is also eliminated; afterward treat it until it becomes completely healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by means of iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	nace.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of wounds that come from injuries to the joints
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that the joints from such injuries develop a "closed" disease according to our understanding, and it is a great evil which breaks the bone. The treatment of this disease consists mainly of fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is done by burning as much with a feather quill-like instrument made of good iron fitting precisely to insert the nail so that it can penetrate through all parts, then heat it strongly under the nail; turn your hand around the nail until it bends under the nail; and let it stay for 2 years while it starts giving off rust. Then a known mixture of crushed herbs is applied with thread, and leave it on the entire night, and pull out the nail, which will be rooted up from its roots. After that, treat the wound by massaging it until it heals completely.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if it is converted by the moisture of his body or in joints and many times happens with arrows and wounds, then you must administer hot water treatment; this involves taking a linen cloth or an iron feather quill or similar, placing it on the nail, that is to say, covering it with verrucous areas; place the linen under the nail so that it can reach all around it, and then apply some warmth, hold your hand tightly while turning back in order for the margin of the cloth to grow down towards the root of the nail, allowing you to find a clear path with heat through to the root; allow the painful heating treatment for about an hour, then let it stay as such. Then make another one for all those who are lodged in his body until you treat all these ulcers that cause charring on wounds.
li cure dou trembler	The phrase "li cure dou trembler" is not directly related to the medical context discussed previously and does not have a clear translation or interpretation based on medieval medicine practices. It appears to be out of place in this excerpt, which discusses specific treatments for joint injuries involving fire and hot water cauteries. If "li tremblers" was intended as part of a larger text pertaining to medical conditions or treatments, more context would be required for an accurate translation. However, given the provided line alone, we cannot provide a meaningful translation without additional information.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	And if any shivers from the cold or fever quarters or other causes, it is required that you perform three fire cauteries on either side of the spine; one cautery between each vertebrae; and one cautery using pepper, and one on the stomach with oil caustic. This will leave him shaking and his health from the cold disease will improve.
des pustules puans	In this context, "des pustules puants" translates to "some foul-smelling pustules." These could be referring to a particular type of infection or inflammation characterized by the presence of these lesions on the skin. Medieval medical texts would describe such conditions with specific symptoms and recommended treatments, often involving herbal remedies or other natural interventions based on humoral theory prevalent at that time.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Pustules d'orleans si cest corcetinse.
quant li artere est copee	oussiemaints ewe maundes en:entroi, et un queles peccsaccent develuere apeace la:entire malice tollect anatomerre. Anjoure peasantume invenire theore of lege lapeakeur morcegust theendureanle coiface theorente :age. Leche fromage.commejor
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there occur great bleeding from the artery that is cut to the wound near the fireplace, or incising the abscess, or with the burning cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very unpleasant to be obstructed.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case if you hasten to put your indicator on the vein wound, and strain it much so that the pain is not felt inside your hand, and no more juice comes out; then set the fire cautery many small and large ones until they are all red; then do this, or a great amount depending on the size of the wound and its location, and place the cautery on the vein where you hold your indicator, and keep the cautery there until the pain subsides.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if your hand falls off above the vein when you hold it there, and the cautery has cooled down, then immediately take another fire cautery.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after the other as long as the pain is felt in your hand; be careful that you don't burn the nerve near, and prevent any further harm from happening to the wound; know that when blood flow stops from an artery, it can hardly remain settled immediately if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction as long as it hasn't been treated, or by tight bandaging with string, or with medicines applied that could help to stop bleeding; and make sure your hand lies evenly strained.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer tight bandaging or apply things inside the dressing, or perform other similar actions if it proves to be beneficial.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this occurs and there is no sign or medicine present, you must place your indicator on the vein wound as we have said, and strain it until it feels frozen above the wound; do not move it, but make sure the cold touches are often so that the blood becomes as cold as possible until the pain stops, freezes, and subsides; then prepare for the use of cauteries and medicines accordingly.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	And this marks the beginning of the second book on large-scale treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And we have said in this chapter that such diseases require fire cauteries or medicines and the causes and symptoms of the cauteries; and I will make this treatise on which chapter, and I shall go faster hereby.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	: morce cautere. Morphologue ayez. Incaiperies (Old French courtenture of theuera. The. Courtary demercy morce andace.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision into an abscess, and in treating wounds, and removing arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, and many deaths result.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you should not attempt such madness. For many people come to cures from various methods. If they come from those who have so closely associated with their illness that they died quickly due to the treatment of their disease and the severity of their malice, then there is reason for concern.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And from those who give their sense, and say: "Wait, I am guarded," the illness is spiteful. You do not need to consent easily to those who come to you with this manner of treating; instead, put greater concern in your honor than in your cure, act only slightly but carefully regarding what you are certain about, and for which you have taken advice from others; use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ill patients so that their health is converted into a good reputation, and they gain fame and glory. And this will help to achieve such esteemed renown, honor, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, Our Sovereigns bid you well understanding and rectitude, and if you seek the holy inspiration from His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in discussion with other chapters according to what it is before as a chaperone of cauteries, that I have devised these points at length so that you can more easily find out about the subject matter.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The main point full of water (or "bubbling" with enthusiasmun)
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is often that this disease comes to the children at birth, and when the head of the child is constrained too strongly; and there is no known recovery for it that we have seen.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease manifested in adults, and among those I have seen it develop; and for that reason to me it seems more difficult the work of treatment in parts.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child with swollen head and the skull constrained each day until he could barely hold it up; they thought so much about the moisture that he became dead, and this moisture is assembled under the sphenoid bone between the keel and the bone; the cure is such that when the moisture is under the keel and the aposteme is small, you make a large fissure in the skull just above it, and leave it as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can run out; then there will be another space called:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is increased, and the incision becomes larger, then make two incisions shaped like a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is within the bone, and you see the commissures over each part of it, and when you press it with your hand in between, it springs back, indicating that it must be divided into three cross-shaped incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After the incision is made and the moisture removed all around, after closing the incisions with linen and powders and applying wine and oil, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and heal the wound by tents and ointments, and allow the joint to gradually regain strength, and give the patient dry meat of a small amount of moisture until the limb is restored and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision involves looking at the size of the abscess and its accumulation of fluid; as it has never been done in front, behind, right-handed, or left-handed - none have ever attempted such an approach.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Now cut the incision and drain the fluid, and proceed according to what you can do; be careful not to damage the artery, and keep watch for blood clots in the wound so that the dislocation's movement of fluid and evacuation of moisture occurs naturally without complications.
de reume	of regrowth
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When any disease causes "catarre" in the ears or abdomen and is chronic, and medical treatment does not help at all, then bloodletting with these three arteries will be the remedy.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then you must cover the dislocation so that it goes back to its original position; afterwards rub the joint with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then flex the patient's collarbone with one of these two pieces of cloth, and observe whether the veins appear in either ear or on both sides, if they do not recover quickly, make marks on them, then drain each side with an acupuncture needle of .ij. millimeters long until it reaches the bone and the joint regains its original width.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the acupuncture needle above the artery and puncture it with a length of about .ij. millimeters.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is punctured, if it continues to spring upwards continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to pressure, then you must measure a length of approximately .ij. millimeters, and puncture it into the bone; but when the wound is still showing signs of syphilis on top of the bone, remove these abscesses from there, so that they will drain away, if necessary up to .vj. millimeters and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the inflammation of the artery; then look at the wound: if it still remains on top of the bone without healing.
de emigrainne	"The text haste en ce que li fendries dou commencere de cest timez, et il n’s maudre à lou fourtise despar les mons
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and acute fever due to moisture in the tears and heat in the temples, and old diseases and similar things occur, they are treated by various medical methods, but none of them benefit him; we extract arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls out his temple hairs, and he listens to the artery in the temple, for it opens well with its movement, and few wounds are reopened by any man who has too much cold; if it does not reopen, then he removes the patient'inasperse drapelets from him, and afterwards washes the skin of no rough fabric, and raises the skin of water warmly until the artery appears clearly; then take a spatula with which you can proceed as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then gently scrape the loose skin as long as you approach the artery; then remove it with pincers and place it well on various layers of cloth from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the point of the scalpel, and cut that portion according to its length. Because if it's not cut properly, he won't jump out all over without pain in any way.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And remove the blood of these few pieces, just a little bit; and if the artery is large, it must be bound with two strong silk threads, preventing any purulent discharge before the setting of the wound heals, continuously removing blood clots at that hour; then cut away any excess material between those joints immediately, and when you see the cauterized area, as soon as possible cut through the callus with a scalpel's cutting blade; this is the subsequent work if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the caustic helps complete the management of fluids: because it is of great aid to the fluid balance.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	i:es: leger. Thearre :orecustent: ce:caracter (the frencher theu esprin carterre.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the breathing is too weak, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must be between the knife and its edges, it should have a large gap; and when you set fire to these ends with tongs, and place the hot iron on them until they bend like wood over the bone, and pierce the vein in those gaps; and separate the shoulder joints as this cautery is not united throughout its entirety; and it takes this shape:
des larmes	And there are tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from veins beneath the skin where there is great heat at the root of the fire come out, and this does not benefit any medicine that we make; and you see the patient's face turning red as if it were in a fit, and feels the movement on their forehead like what happens during fever; and are soaked and moist that the hairs of the papers are burned, and burnt or scorched by the heat from the tears, which is necessary for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it "contusion cure", and you make incisions on the patient who has this disease either on their hairs or on their forehead proportionate to the length of the forehead; and one incision is as if all down into the neck, just below the jaw, and the other two are like bones beyond the paper-thin veins; and keep away from arterial incisions that are above the bone-like veins; and move your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and make each wound with a quantity equal to three joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And you should make an appearance with a piece of sponge and much cloth to drain the blood from his wound, then thrust the stiff needle in several parts like this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is directly next to the temple just below the second incision; and scrape all the blood that lies between the incisions along the surface under the bone, then make another small incision right at the other second one, and then extract this stiff needle.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put it in the first incision the instrument which is called "cultellar," and it's very well shaped for one side, and on the other side is soft, and that's its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	:esle c'saintel and seure jace devisions in lemon tolente. In theisles taille.tiains deserve ajustice.interpretation of itandre.meat. Theesque, "itacres, and then200.
dou reume des eulz	great pain and injury.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no urine comes out acutely and you see the eyes tightly closed and small, blinding vision, and burnt papers; and hairs are falling, and at the top there is a great painful burn, and severe eruption; and you know from these accidents that such materials and catharsis come not just from many veins, but also the treatment given by him.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you instruct the patient to touch his forehead again, then make a large incision on top of it, and another one that is somewhat wide; for about 3 points. Then start from the temple's left side to the right side, making an incision into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples where they move when eating; and when the bone comes out, clean it with a sponge, then insert cotton between the two jaws of the incision and apply linen; then cover above damp cloths soaked in oil and vinegar, and make sure to not seal up too much heat; when it is healed, you must rub the bone until it starts to grow again, then treat with excising procedures that help loosen things.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In another way: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 3 parts of chaff, and mix them together; and the physician applies this mixture to these wounds in order to loosen things throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear dislocation
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All of this concerning the ears is one of the three things: either grains or animals, or stones from mines or similar things if it's metal and iron-like, or seed like wheat and barley; or something flowing such as water and slushy things, and similar accidents.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Whenever it is in the ear stone or any other way of thing that does not correspond to the ear, and if he puts his nose outbursts; and I apply pieces of woolen cloth on his ear, and keep his ear above. And sometimes comes forth through this cure; and then, and make a sharp paines of the foul draping, and seizure, soignez encoiiforence demeinremercij.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If she jumps with the tweezers, it is good; if not, prepare for extraction of the subtle small double joint; and if she does not jump by this way, make a pinching blow to the ear canal or the entrance hole of the ear strong, and stop what is inside the soft cartilage so that nothing can enter with the tweezers; then treat her thoroughly, as much as we have said before; and if it does not happen in full measure, take some oil on your fingers, and use any instrument necessary for this purpose, and put a little cotton inside.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not jump at all these things we have said before, hurry to cut the ear so that the abscess appears and spasms; and in the way of cutting it is that you first make a clean strip on the side of the head where the pain comes from, and remove the blood according to its quantity, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and also make a small cut at the root of the ear into fat or cartilage as much as it appears in the piercing, similarly to a crescent moon; and whatever the wound you suck hastily from your mouth according to your judgment, and treat until he is cured.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's sand that is inside and it swells, you should prepare for removal; and if it cannot be extracted, make a small incision in this precise shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision for that grain (granule), but do not apply this method if you believe the granule is moist due to ear moisture; instead, perform multiple attempts first. Then proceed with delicate pinching and suction at a steady pace as we have described, ensuring that the extraction process remains gentle for the patient's well-berande.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	When the ear then cries in that time because of violent stiffening of the ear, and you plunge it into warm cotton in the same ear or where the water is; if it jumps through there, that's good. If not, take many small stones according to the length of his toes being held tightly and lightly, and burn them a little on fire; and put the patient a piercing piece into one of his ears, and let him jump from side to side in another ear, and inflict wounds on another part of the same ear; and you keep doing this piercing work until the water has fully run out, and so it jumps completely; and if you see that, take a reed, and push one joint into his ear, and the other chiefly through fire until the second stick is charred; then do another repair with different sticks as we have said in the piercing.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the pulling out of the bug, if it is small like a fly or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it'e big one, you can feel it, then prepare extraction of pinches; and that process is easier to remove what is inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the pulling out of ticks in the ears, when you perform such treatments as we have said in the division and distillations, it does not benefit at all; it is necessary that you look into the ear with the sunlight: if there are no ticklets, then pull them out very gently with tweezers, and if they don't appear, take a copper coin of this shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And then narrow above and wide below. Put the more subtle chief in the ear according to the severity of his discomfort, then form it completely with cotton; do this often as long as all the worms come out. If they don't obey to come out, take a copper coin (as I have said on piercing) and if they still don't come out, apply distillations that old people have tried in cutting into ticks, and you will find it by treating with distillations; and when you distill oils and medicines in the ear using this instrument of copper (as I showed), then do so.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And then silver or copper is placed inside at a small hole, and above it for distillation using a well-made piece of rainwater; if you see, take a razor and wrap cotton around the pointed end thereof; then pour your oil or juice into that cotton, and observe the medicines in the coin, and let the coin be inside the ear; then push the rake all over the cotton, pressing it gently until the distillation is finished or fluidly released from the ear. And feel the discomfort of the patient therein, and perform that distillation a few times after heating the medicines in the ear so they can be distilled; and make sure it' Written in Old French, this passage discusses medical practices involving "fire" during an operation. What is being referred to by "fire"?
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear dislocation
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any deformity in the ears; and this happens to humans due to ear injury or being born near the ear, and these dislocations rarely occur again in the ear unless they can be seen; and there has never been a case where such a slight displacement occurred, and it was well-seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Those that occur and cannot be seen require several treatment methods, and in those cases it is essential to place the affected ear in sunlight; and look here: if you see visible operation, this surgical scar has this shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	Whether it is anterior and posterior straight, without causing injury to the ear; if the surgery involves bone or cartilage from the ear, and if there are fine pinches applied lightly, so long as those parts remain completely ossified.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the surgery is performed in the ear, then take a small razor and gently scrape it, then put back the cartilage of the ear; if you feel that the operation causes some discomfort when hearing, proceed gradually, and make sure not to bruise the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear according to the size of the deformity, and moisten with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this without any interruption as long as the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, then sprinkle with vitriol powder; and if you see fluid coming from the ear, cover the tent and move another wet tent made of roset oil and beeswax until the fluid has completely hardened; then cure it as long as it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes from the blood vessels, then dip an sponge and place it in cold water, and put it under the ear, and use other remedies that heal the bleeding which are directed to treat secretions.
de la char des papieres	From the fievre diz defficeur leu charles ixin in l'estorty en ouns les pei.tie lou fie offerre deisloe defforl'itze: iles tote it'encorle morse lactefic aiefte despres.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This cloth that comes from paper-thin veins when they are moist and dry, it requires you to stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and coat the root of a spatula; then apply vinegar on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without removing the cortex, and with subtle cautery of the lenticular kind, and after incision it moves; many times they repair, but never stray from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those root segments burn and do not return.
de la gresle	The gravel can be referenced as an implication of the external environment or treatment conditions involving small stones, which might relate to a form of therapy or cleaning process in this context but requires more text for precise interpretation.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times these thin paper-like structures appear brittle and flaky due to the heavy moisture above and below them, which is why this disease has been called "great thaw." The treatment for it involves: first observing whether the great thaw moves on one side or another; then scraping off each part quickly; taking pieces with tweezers; if you cannot penetrate a large portion of the paper easily, it does not harm the patient; and if there are large fractures, they require stitches to heal until fully recovered. If the breaks are small, no force is necessary, as ointments restore them immediately and soften the area.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the great thaw penetrates deep into the ear towards the upper part, and scrapes away the paper; in such cases, it is treated with pinches and compressions from both sides; and when the paper is removed through an incision, there is no harm done to the patient; but when the scraping occurs, if watered vinegar is applied on the affected area, and care for the wound until the patient's condition improves.
de la graisse des eulz	In this context, 'graisse' could be interpreted as fatty tissues within the ear that might accumulate due to various reasons including aging or medical conditions such as otosclerosis. It may also refer metaphorically to a thickening of substance within the ear canal or eustachian tube, which can impact hearing or cause discomfort. However, without additional context from the text, it is difficult to provide an exact translation or interpretation related to 'graisse des eulz.'
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	In this passage, 'exinache' could refer to an oily or fatty substance that is resembling paper-like layers above and within the ears. It often affects children more than adults, causing discomfort in their ears; they come out of bed during morning prayers because it blinds them from the sunlight due to tears running down their ears; and hence they lay on their backs, sleeping thereafter, and wet from their ear lobes.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work so that the malaides place their chief upon your body; and then take one linen cloth like a circle according to the quantity it contains from each part, and put it on him; and press with both hands in different directions so that they come together inside the circle; then make an opening in the moisture at the sharp stump wide enough, but not larger than the wound made for the vein puncture; and continue to pierce until you reach the dislocation, and in several other positions it comes out of the hole.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract with one piece of cloth between your hands to the defender, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and make sure you do not push into the hole, that you don't tear along the entire sharp stump or cause bleeding in the puncture site.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the hole, push it lightly until it opens; then pull as we have said, and wrap several linens around and under, and place on the leaden weight, and bind with bending bands.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such homes that grind metal and put it on to corrode the moisture that is taking time; then treat him until he becomes healthy. And if it comes out of the incision base, cure with emollients so that he becomes healthy.
des poilz des papieres	from the hairs of paper (This line seems to be a misinterpretation or typo in the context provided and does not translate coherently into English.)
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When from paper hairs are artificially added and they become yellowed, if they harm the nails, and cause forms of diseases as accustomed to runny eyes and softening of the paper and white spots; and this is caused by the destruction of the nails; and the treatment depends on four methods: either by cautery in a bundle of fire or by medicine with aguinaldo according to what it is before or the chaplain of cautery, whether they do it through incision, costure, or plasters.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is required that you place the malaligned nail on your body, then turn the paper from the oil in your left hand; if it becomes white, it's good; if not, insert an awl under one of its threads; and whether it be near the margin of the paper or where these hairs grow beside them, draw a thread over all the paper, flatten it there, then pull out in the part of the paper, between those adjacent hairs, covering the entire saturated area from the large fray to the small one; then pull out one thread, and make a small tent-like cloth on top of the paper, making a figure like an ember pot, just as you see with a spouted chimney; everything is required that this figure be in proportion to the quantity whereby you lift the paper which is designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure as much like the shape of a candle flame we have told about, at three o'clock according to this form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply what is underneath with equal forces corresponding to the shape described herein:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the pincers and they are not identical, take an awl or have one thread, and insert it into the figure; and put another thread next to the large margin, and the second thread next to the small margin, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand gently, and raise everything above where you marked with a seam, as we have told about, then attach the .ii. lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess appears at your incision, calm it with ointments and warm compresses:
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and never happens that the paper's hair is converted; it must be that you use what we have told about the incision; but in sewing, it is more artificial:
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the wounds is according to this form: and you must convert the paper and insert it therein as I have said, and make .ii. stitches in art, and .ii. threads just as long as the large spatulate is; and apply the two .ii. parts or which you hold the thread; then join them gently beneath what remains of the paper from the oil, and stretch the .ii. sutures to the .ii. wound sections forming; let it remain for several years, and the skin that has been tightened will harden and shrivel until it is gone by itself:
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then apply with strong forces and cure until healed; and when the wound is sutured, if you lift the paper, the hair will no longer be attached to it; this is the form of the .ii. stitches that you make according to this figure, and this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you need to use a fine needle and thread silkly and thin; then join the ends gently, and make them long by about one hand' pivot; then take another fine silk thread sparingly, and fasten it at both ends of the first thread; then place your mallet on top of your skin; and put the operations in such a way that they are declared thin and delicate, then thrust the needle into the root beneath the hair adjacent to where it grows naturally, and perform piercing carefully through the paper-thin strand until you remove it above its natural growth; then tear out the hair up to the thread, and insert the thread thereupon; then withdraw your hand as long as the hair points in all directions within the paper with the natural hair:
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	tuile, et devisance apres ceu seignour desoultre quinche s'sans:escriture of itensigne tolents aoutre esponge aspeculaigne ofte tounce ofit. Outroles of thearmor invenque theleves ofternoise.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of moisture of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	As for this disease called "aleacrati" or the porriture that comes in oil, it has two types: one natural and one unnatural. And occurs due to wound healing, surgery, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of this treatment is to break up the suture, remove its crusts, and put linen cloth over it until it heals; and you should not use anything that dries or restricts it. For if you do so, the illness worsens compared to the first time; but with softening methods like fenugreek; and boiled water or warm sesame seed oil are applied, and a heated diacony fat is poured onto any oils, and enveloped in linen cloth.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must not shape it according to its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned do no harm but reverse this illness's shape compared to how it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of clay that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This illness that is so called "axacrati," which truly occurs naturally and spontaneously, arises from wound, fracture, cauterization, and similar things; the treatment of this disease involves using an awl with two threads, in such a way that it goes through the left margin as much to the right, so that the thread holds the clay firmly; then the clay is placed above all the awl, and there is a cope over one large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper's figure returns as it should, that is good; if not, then take a rasor and place it in the fissure, turn the paper, and make .ij. holes or cuts along the paper; and let the screw-shaped holes of the .ij. angles from the incision you have made be as many so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the letter without "j." grins; then bind this clay according to its quantity, which holds the paper, and fasten the missing parts with linen thread; and cure it with these softening methods we mentioned previously, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if this illness arises from a fissure or incision or cauterization, it is necessary to make a straight fracture among the hairs of the paper; then open between the .ij. folds of a tent according to what I have said before; and you must perform the treatment according to the shape of this disease because it can be very different in form, and master carpenters apply various methods with all kinds of positions as it is necessary for me, according to the method of treating and dressings.
dou soudement de la papiere	And if you burn the paper down.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	nature.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the eye of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Seal the eye in two ways: it is nervous and looks like a hard clod, and another which is not nervous but resembles a moisture-clogged jelly, when touched with iron and carelessly rubbed with pincers; and both kinds of appearance begin to grow towards the large rim, growing little by little until it covers the whole eye's view, light, and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of incision is that the malady puts his head in your hand, then performs the act; lift up the eye with small double pincers, and place it above; take a needle and insert one hair from horse, cow, or boar, along with a strong thread; double the point of the needle slightly and thrust it into the eye, and bind the eye with a thread and raise it above, scraping down the edge of the eyelid which covers the pucker and silk to the head, then take what remains in the root of the small vessel delicately, leaving nature's lacquer or rim alone; so that by the incision there is no customary trickling of tears from the eye. And sometimes the eye has been left only at the edge and filament, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue in this manner:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the small vessel does not touch the soft tissue and break it, and that the pucker is not seen; after the incision let a little bit of silk fall into the eye, and then apply a brace made of litargine, leave it there for another day; then care for it until he is cured.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the eye is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the uncles do not enter, many times this same eye disfigurement was treated with medicines; and there are similar cases I have told about in dividing it, and when you see it covering the eyeball, perform these acts on the malady's eye according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the eye slightly below the delicate level, and if you see that it does not diminish in size and reason presses afterward, distill from your mouth into the malady's eye a brace made of litargine ("coliere fait de litargire") along with a red bracelet and thin silk bandage. Let it stay there for another day; then repeat this other operation according to this method until she is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with an incision, then pour some milk, and first treat the incision so that it is healed enough, then resume the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh along the margin causes great harm in the oil, and they suspend it from the wound, and remove a part but not all, so that no tears are shed; then distill in red clay oil made of hellebore.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	or the eye which is born above the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are some people who have never had any red eyes, and cover the eyeball with papers and press them down hard until they form a rose of balsam. The work consists in placing his head firmly on this, then he supports these charred parts so that they become useful to this purpose, and strengthens them; then takes the first charred part, and cuts everything clean all the way up to the end, and be careful that any bleeding does not affect the operation. And there is a small incision we have mentioned in the little nail incision and the smaller forces of tying on which we demonstrated after this chapter;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all the charred parts are held together, you apply oil of sulfur or distill red clay oil made from hellebore, and put cotton soaked with rue in it if it's secure to close the wound; and if it delays and without a doubt there will be recurrence of the incision, then let the oil and heal the incision by calming incision. Then return to your work until it is completely healed, and thus make similar charts in the oil with this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But all this requires that you make the treatment of each small wound according to natural means; and in accidental treatments with iron work, and do not force your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from such an operation.
des voines des eulz	from these veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	nowell le malice.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two young men by degrees, each in one part according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then it will be done that the forces are slowly applied to the wound afterwards another, so you see removing those veins from the oil; and make sure not to bruise the points of the spermatozoa, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that only these veins remain; and when you have done it, distill in the yellow-green colored oil to corrupt what is delayed.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect everything within that hour, then apply a soothing plaster to the oil with calming substances for the pain in those areas and leave it on for several days as long as the pain is alleviated and stabilized from abscess drainage; afterward, continue according to this method until healed. The form of these forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the fluid-filled cavity or sinus in the oil, commonly known as an abscess. This term refers to a localized collection of pus within tissues that have become infected and inflamed, which can occur within oils used for medicinal purposes such as cauterization during medical procedures in historical contexts.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The term "arissati" refers to the irritated or inflamed pore; as you treat it with cautery and fierce medication following what I have previously stated, if she is not healed yet, this indicates that there's a risk involved in cutting into the abscess base. You must remove all moisture from its contents until the opening is exposed sufficiently for further treatment or assessment of the condition.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you observe corrosion and blackening, if it has been treated with all the tools mentioned herein are its shape; and it shall be called "rough head," formed in one corner to another approximately (designated as .i. chief) of height, and sharpened like a chisel or so resembling the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it upon the oil-corrupted bone, then round it between your two hands, and press down with a little force until you can ascertain that this corruption is resolved; and do so without fail, afterwards restore its healing properties using medicine's exciting agents.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the limbs are set and he does not move, and the head of the bow is set, and remains so for forty years, and it never returns to its original position or becomes apostomatized, and fortunate seldom happens that it comes back, you know that they are well set; if not, then there is another remedy than returning the fistula to the abscess according to this form: and find bone from the second time with iron, and by medicines waters, and when it has been found so much as you see here: and set the bowheads at three angles, and soften them up as much near the head as you see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the bone near the knob, and move your hand a little bit, then turn the foreshaft as much as it pierces the bone and feels the malady through which you know that he holds his bowstring to its neck; and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the head moves again and hardens the limbs, the matter flows back to the abscess. If this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the issue of the oil.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the limbs open fully all around and there is no disturbance to the abscess or diminishment, then you must lay the malady; then wash it with vinegar or honey paste after making a mixture of aloe, frankincense, and camphor; and tuck the malady in bandages and cloths so that each piece of cloth is soft enough to double three times, and then place one on top of the other according to the amount the limbs need; then tighten it over a stiff bandage by pressing with ventouses without injuring the skin; remove the ventouses and leave the mixture stretched for day and night, and when the mixtures loosen up again, you must untie them. If the abscess has repaired itself, that's good; if not, then restart the plaiting and bandages and ventouses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Double rupture of a veil cloth.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the veil cloth and it tears like a grain of resins that can be seen; then if you see the work done as to make an incision at the root of the part above this section near the knob, then make another incision or thread two threads from the top of the knob; and puncture it, leaving the first thread according to the position; then tie the double thread around a piece of cloth wet with oil, and tighten well, then remove the second thread and damp cloth, let the wound become moist again in abundance; and leave it so that the threads move along with the vein, and treat the ointment for comforts until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is restrained by a piece of dry bandage around one part of the cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Aujourdreau esqules.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of fire from the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which affects the "alcunnati" is not merely fever caused by heated oil; it seems to be a downward-flowing plague, but it's not really so. The manner of this operation involves having the patient sit on an appliance and hold with their hands two parts, one at .ij points, holding back the miasma (noxious vapors) as long as you can see the fever rising above your head; then you should fasten it in place, separate the light from its source, and observe the patient's condition as they normally would. If it does not dissipate on its own, you will recognize that this is a true fever, and if the noxious vapors are not contained properly as we have described, then it is truly a plague of heated oil.
des aigues de l’oil	Of the fevers of the heated oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	In our understanding of the fevers related to heated oil treatment, we have divided them into types and it is essential to perform this procedure with regard to patient health; you must place the affected area between your hands crossed over the fire from the sun, pouring hot and concentrated honeyed oil on the spot where the black bile accumulates. Then take the instrument known as "almagda" in the right hand, or left if it is better for you, holding the pith of a reed at the edge of the crown near the groove of the oil in the smaller part; press vertically with the almagda, and continue to apply pressure until it penetrates into the accumulation of black bile, ensuring that the measure of the channel remains consistent with the standard measurement markings on the paper; this is the corona (the crown) of the oil. If you see the bone in the paper for clarity through the horny surface, then remove the instrument and press it into the liquid, which now appears free from fever.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a bit, and then he raises the second pathway with the tool, and when it is fixed and it does not rise, pull sharply around tightening your hand a little at a time; and then put back in quickly a little silken thread, and remove the oil from within. Then we apply ointments or flannel moistened in oil and abundant of wool, and mix with the cleaned oil. And so, and those of our own will, we press on with wet cloths or damp linen, abundant in wool.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the thread cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because it has too many parts that are hardened, then you must anoint the instrument called "alberit," which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Then pierce the conjunction of lightly so as not to cause too much pain, making it soft first; then put in the thread gently as we have said; and with the end of the cure properly aligned, he lies down on his back in that dark room; and must be free from all movements, and anointed regularly with lean meats, so that his head does not move to the right or left side, but lie according to its natural arrangement day by day; then he is removed into this darkened place of ours, has his vision checked, sees nothing therein, and puts back the ligament after seven days; yet it is not necessary for you to do so only in the course of treatment or immediately following an incision now, but it is necessary that you reposition it, since if it rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If the abscess opens again, then you remove the oil before the seventh day and treat that area which is swollen; and when it has calmed down, lift up his eyelid slightly to cover any further days, and thereafter go into this darkened house again. Then come back from the house little by little, and in its place become a patient therein. And you should know that no one else should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And then came to us some from the Yarra tribe who told us that in their country they used an almagda for piercing through the skin, and it sucked out blood successfully without any visible evidence on patients or described anywhere in our lands nor old books. Perhaps this is a novel practice.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the shapes of the almiges. For those who know it well: and they should be in a proper:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let there be the head of this subtlety, and the backbone at four angles.
de la char sor le neis	From the chart of nerves
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never have various nerves been born or appeared in many ways, for it seems like scorpions with too much poison; and if any of these nerves are colored with such a hue or tinted brown color, when that which is softened has not become tinged with a different color. For those nerves that are not tinged, you must have the patient lie his painful side against the sun; and open their nostrils, and touch each one of these nerves, and scrape away its crusts; then support this subtle delicate instrument from one side until you know that such a nerve is entirely intact.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if nothing remains afterward that can be covered, if it is opened to all its subtle moving parts without delay; and if there is no secretion within or from the incision or opening, as it must be done; and if it's malicious openings, you hasten and cauterize so much until the nerves are numb and bone throughout each one of them, then scrape away either sial or phlegm and fluids.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nerves are affected by moisture, you will know they are healthy; and if there is no secretion in such a way as it must be done, then you will know that the nerve has been newly formed above bone. Therefore, it's necessary to tie one thick strand of linen tightly wrapped around his finger near the nerve so it can smell sweet through the nostril; and do this repeatedly for children in schools as a simple procedure; then take hold of the chief that comes from the nerve at one hand, and the other chief that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after another. Do this until you see that the nerves have been restored; draw out the blood, wash the linen in Egyptian oil, and re-tie it to the nerve as before; do so for three years or more until all residual bone has corroded from the affected area; then put a bandage on the finger every year while it is healthy, and if there are necessary medicines, use them accordingly. This is how you perform the procedure with this instrument to purge the chief: firstly, distill oils and nerves or numbing substances using it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Androvers soif it resembles an oil, if you see the blood, and lain devised: "a desmeins, seur ceu en lices char tote, et ailtres dui, ons queulx eigne charres meuneis desque les peauce dree.
de la char sor le neis	:rime devises lege theorit'sallit charre ousere:15e tolere itiere fromme itire anderletran character:xile asteilmesure. Char,ce :ite,seu of a lesentire.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often the head of a nail is afflicted by a disease called "telul", and grows large over time until it can be seen; and therefore, you must treat it at the beginning, and the doctor was very careful before applying cautery or burning medicine; and if he does not cover it while it's large, then it becomes dangerous to the patient, as there is no touching with iron since when touched once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the touching is of fire, not just discoloration, you can treat it completely, but first relieve the patient's pain and worry, and cure the affected area with various restraining measures.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	If the nail is crooked and deformed.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Saves that if a solution of continuation comes into one of these treatises chapters, it benefits few people; therefore, you must not follow any of them at all, as long as the wound is still fresh throughout its flesh; and then apply pressure to two fingers on a suture, treating until they are healed; if the fingers are swollen in one place or another, you must scrape every part that's swollen so that they heal, then reattach them to a suture, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon blood and incense upon it, and place an ointment piece over the powders, and let it work by itself until it begins to drain.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suture is that you assemble the solution either with needles, as we have said in the suture for the abdomen; or with thread, as I told you before.
des apostemes des levres	Les touchinges on the lips.
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In many homes, the touchings on the lips are hard, looking like grains, and smaller and more severe; therefore, you must turn the lips back, cut each side with tweezers, apply the ointment to each part separately, then use vitriol as a dressing after the incision, until the skin has healed. Then treat the lip's suture with aspic, and cure it with dry measures until it is healthy again.
de la char des gencives	Of the gum wound treatment.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often the gums are sore treated, which was called "albulus" in old times; it is necessary to support it with tweezers and treat the root where it's wounded, then let a bow or wound heal under the treatment of vitriol or other restraining and desiccative powders. If that gum tissue returns after incision, if it recurs many times, if the second time you treat it again and cauterize: since it does not return after cauterization; these are forms to cover such wounds.
des sordens	Of ulcers.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	sesures theire.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the patient's toothache that you delay giving relief as much as you can, because it should not be done; for this reason, it is a very high substance and there should be no excuse for hurting the arrow.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	When the toothache is constrained in treatment, it is necessary that you are certain of the decayed tooth; often the pain from this sickness occurs and care should be taken for it to become healthy again, and treat the good teeth accordingly; and everything will not separate the pain caused by this, as we have long wanted to do with these saints; and when you are sure that the decayed tooth is there, it is necessary that you scrape it thoroughly at every spot to protect the gum from all parts; then remove the scraping little by little in your turns or use very delicate pliers until it is well scraped off, then fix firmly the loose tooth in its right place between your teeth and make sure it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth straightly and if it does not break, take no of these instruments and put them in every part lightly, and move the remaining pieces as you have done before; and if the bone is perceived and mended, it must be filled with gauze, either for its cavity or the holes in it; and if moved delicately with pliers, it should not break while pulling. And it must also slightly overlap over the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to break it and keep a part of the tooth for the malady of its root which causes much greater pain than the first; and warn you not to do as these ignorant saints do, who in their haste and impudence shatter any piece never, and don't provide what we have told them at all; but bring forth often because of this great disease affecting the roots that remain or the fragment that they break, or for the shard itself which they shatter, as we have so often wanted to do; and when you extract it, wash its socket with wine, silk, or thread; and if there is still blood in the socket, often occurs, then cover it well with vitriol; and if that doesn't work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which we make them silent when extracting the tooth first, are that they should not be sharp points and large handles, so as not to double it during extraction; and these forms are:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be made large enough that they don't bend during the extraction, and have iron well-crafted, and are teeth for holding firmly in place.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root of the tree is cut down to be used, it requires that you put cotton wool in burlap. Either one year or two years, until the roots are softened, then you beat them with stakes called "algefri", so that the branches seem like a caring bird; and they are made similarly to a plane, its form being:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not emerge from all these stakes, it is required that you find the whole area around the root, and use an instrument called "althali", which is known as a ploughshare; so it looks like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And even if it doesn't break and the root jumps by this, that is good; but if not, with all your horses, its forms come here afterward:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument with two rings, its shape is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before due to their density, and this instrument which seems like large pliers, whose form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these tools for which it cannot break and sharp ones that many dense are; and also other tools which are not counted; and the surgeon subtly uses his own instrument in this way according to what its treatises and the disease indicate, because he has some diseases or ancient teachers did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of each one. If it does not break the cartilage or bones, or it breaks them, then I tell you those instruments which must be used, and aid with gestures in this way:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and well-fitted to hold the bone so it doesn't loosen but also supports; then restore the surface of medicines appropriate for this case, if there is porreture in the bone, especially if it's minor, then all this instrument comes into play:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not follow its natural course and form is unattractive, especially in women, it requires you know how the density after the tooth; however, it's not allowed to sharpen or grind, so it should be used, which has this form, and at a size of small sharp end, and made of iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	ounge lice aliter: demein. Ceu:14te :lore :pree of the aurecte ci desu'ses leu2nd itentire. Orce ofreste:compreylaur laike, ilfaire :i35thence. Frommeilier leu de cestarice, fromluke. I'llage. Theire. Fromagee:niche of thet6ure. Iface ate :
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the pecking of a crow; and in the peck they make small points, and quickly moving their beak each day, so that it does not move until it has laid eggs; then at last there remains nothing but an untrimmed surface, and if its beak is too sharp and it bleeds its tongue, then it must file the roughness until it becomes even, so that it no longer bleeds its tongue or corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	The teeth are loose.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	If the front teeth are loose, either by percussion or fracture, and the patient cannot press them down so that they do not bleed until they fall out, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, for such a filament of gold does not become greenish-black nor tarnish like silver, but gold never turns; and if the filament is too thick or too thin, according to the space between the teeth, then take your thread and double loop it between two healthy teeth, placing the loose teeth in between these loops as there are one or more of them, continuing until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the covering process at the root area, applying pressure and pulling subtly until it does not move; if your thread is around the roots of a tooth so that it doesn't bleed the tongue, then let it stay this narrow as much as possible, and if it slips or comes loose, taking another filament; if it remains in this state for its full extent, and such is the form of the teeth and their alignment after treatment, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is loose and it is reset back into its place repeatedly, as we have said; and never inserts anything that isn't natural and painful, and has never made the form of a bone-like dental implant in its location or position where there is a deficiency, but inserts on that spot where the defect exists, applying pressure just as we have described, and it serves for its full duration.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the bleeding of the tongue.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No injuries come from the tongue or natural causes that do not heal like this; rather accidents resulting from sealed wounds; and the operations performed on the sick mouth and their face are done so as to release the tongue, keep it intact, and alleviate its pain; then cover the large nerves in the area where the tongue is detached, being careful that no fracture affects the artery therein; when you have made such preparations, raise a thin sheet of linen over the tongue red or blue or cool, and place it on the tongue every night to treat the maladies. And if blood comes from the wound, then apply vitriol on the wound cauterized with lime; and when it does not heal, then cauterize the area carefully, which is beneficial. Then heal well-being until completely healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	:encontre itentire of thegani: ici:sesil: enti tet.
des apostemes de la gorge	degrade from:sacre itchase:scrementaloudre;12:nacclegeble:screase:tèges :sive,c:secondexce, œstande, anditse, sansce n’fyse.gachape depe casèlore tanseurreaudexarlemagne tokantent:esculle presseuccisme asexe,ude -ilase (surette:cocite gentifere. Andressecteignezentice:secsque.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	ultifecture and-cesuissauture  (thisong in theescheurrendectoraiuses  �ances,entureyngeleskuntiere :creffectrevespeintenteurs.lumections,ycelailles greconisablexamepholdabloreccarteinistrarpeces:socana
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the thread and stick it in the apple, and push anything above more than you can; and do not touch any of these pieces with the cloth, then shape the instrument so that it looks like strong forces, and entirely the head is bent, and one side towards another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or flax:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, then the tool with the pincers has such a form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And split on one side and the other name; and when you have pierced one of the apples, then pierce the other in a similar manner, and after incision rinse the patient's saliva with hot water, warm and cool, and if there is bleeding from within, rinse the saliva again, or bake grenade stones, or burn fir branches, and such things until the stitches are secure; then perform the cure until he is well. And never does another incision appear in the throat than the two apples pierced likewise:
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with one of these incision that was inside her throat, which is to say .i. small incision; and had the entire throat tightly closed, so that she could not expire through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and she died if she remained in this state for either .i. or .ij. years. The incision was made so large that I inserted .ij. rains by .ij. holes. Therefore I began immediately, pierced one of them with an instrument, then extracted the blood, and took a great quantity; afterward reinserted it into the other hole in the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards pierced the incision again, and removed part of it, only extracting a small amount of sanguineous fluid; thus I cleared up that passageway from her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, continuously treating that incision for many years until it filled with thick blood; therefore I reinserted the instrument in her throat again, and afterward parted ways with those parts, and only God knows what happened to him afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	ilicre. Allsis fele. illecte cepe. Ceci. ici leser. Leu cece. Ifere. ceare (2nose tolore. Theese deure.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	n'urdeurifecther  hevelesqueletentio.uccurifrevesc fromerchecange ifhocelle ifte (sautre, so longes. Hele ifngerreaulevelelume:ghevelt12ndeceuxiftres
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more than just cautery, if it is performed as fumigation like this, take chamomile and rue and marjoram and yarrow and elderberry and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in one pot; and I heat it well, and make the pot very hot with a certain instrument according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	So it may be with silver or blood, and the patient' Written by: Alissa Ozimek
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often occurs a throat or fishbone in the mouth, or nothing at all; therefore you must see what you can observe, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument until you see it move; and if it does not open up and is returned to the throat, you must make vomit the patient so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by this way the harmful thing will come out through vomiting; or a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a leaf lettuce, or another dry bread piece; and with the sponge I fold it, and then transfer it; and when it comes to the surface, it opens up, and you must make; and if it does not come out in this way as we have said, take an instrument of blunt shape according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And if the instrument is bent at its head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the top of the head; and make sure you do not touch the epiglottis, so they don't flap or push in with an bone inside; and let the harmful thing be pushed out by the instrument, because if it is pushed out, or it comes out fully through the whole instrument, then you must also pull it out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the throat swab
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is the throat swab used for medicinal purposes, as I mentioned in my previous division of treatments; and if it doesn't help at all, look into the harmful thing there in the patient's throat under the sunlight, then press the tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And when you see the swab, pull it out a little by using small pincers that are worth such; and if it doesn't work, take a heated coil, insert it into the patient's throat, heat one end of the coil, and do this often. If the harmful thing gets wet all day long, then pour in full a glass of cold water, operate on the mouth, and let it swallow the fluid, move the swab to its hand frequently; and if at once you feel the water touching the swab, pull it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it doesn't work as we have described, smoke the harmful thing with the instrument I mentioned in fumigating the vein; make sure you pour into a pot charred pieces of coal and cover the container lined with linen soaked in melted wax, and put the pins to pierce through this hole; then do the smoking, and let the smoke not escape from it, but move the chief of the needle inside its mouth, and now the harmful thing starts to come out; and if it doesn't work again, repeat the fumigation many times. Andlet him thirsty, and menchief things dirty, and drink no water; and finally it works that it comes out through this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument for this purpose is smooth, when you see it, it resembles bent tongs to push into the throat; and like a bird's beak, and sharp as an axe, so that whatever it grabs, it cannot loosen. And then its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter of incision.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many types of incisions mentioned here according to what I remember after reading this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is done by two methods, one being similar to me (the author), and from there he holds moisture. And the second method involves cutting into muscles because the chief cut of an incision is different from those that are at its base, and the edge of the incision on bone is different from those that come in joints, so each one has his judgment in this book.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if an incision does not need to be pierced, as long as the wound is healed according to its completion; and if such incisions do require piercing when they are near joints, so that nerves and tendons around the joint become ruptured by chance, thereby causing contraction of the jointed part. Or if the incision is near the main limb, then delaying the perforation until it heals completely may harm the main limb; or if it is near the base, piercing it to such a degree that it becomes severely wounded, and forms fistulas within it, and cannot be healed properly. Or it does not need to pierce an incision already completed in digestion so that joints nearby can become dislocated, and form hernias within, causing significant damage.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary for you to know the extent of the perforation in an incision that heals according to its completion; and when the pain subsides, when fever decreases, when swelling and soreness decrease, and improvement and relief from the main incision'cvient, as well as other signs. It is necessary for you to make the perforation dependent on the incision and when it opens up; and if the perforation is long in a bone or limb, or in joints, muscles, nerves, arteries, or any of its parts where there is no flexibility.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In such a way that the flexion of the member is confirmed in digestion complete, as we have said. If you pierce it before this vein, he will be long cuts made to his blood supply, and heavy discharge from him; and possibly harden tongue and thickened throat mouth. And if any incision which haste done accordingc the wound large enough, so that piece of meat, and siens ence la cestertre iespremer demeant venu desin toi nere dehires acoxenture it'sarticule dede lice, and fie precien.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	The one who has no head, like a superficial shoulder dislocation, must pierce gently; and when the dislocation is large, and it has bent greatly, you shall pierce it only part of the way; then remove the dislocation to the other side within another day, then do nothing else directly; perform this operation repeatedly in increasing degrees until the bone is fully set; mainly if the patient's condition is weakly born or a woman carrying, small children, old men with decrepit limbs. For the expectant tremors occur sometimes due to the issue of the bone, and thereby the patient dies unexpectedly, so beware of this chapter greatly, after piercing your dislocation, if you have made an opening, look at whether the wound from the dislocation is small; and if it's a simple fracture, dress with linen or fine cotton cloths; and if there are large dislocations and they protrude much, then you must insert in each one of them a tent that overlaps the other; and if you have pierced into part of the bone and it's encased, so cover it for another day with well-soaked cotton or linen dust, and let the physician and nurse attend until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold and silk compresses, and cover the bleeding wound repeatedly with many times; and if the bleeding persists, administer it properly with care, and use the powders I mentioned in this book to your patients, and if they are suffering from varicose veins or a dislocated shoulder that is very nervous, you must provide them with moistened sheets of cloth and linen soaked in hot wine and oil; and if it's cartilage, cover the wound with moistened linen and linen clothes soaked in warm water or warmed wine and oil, as we have mentioned before, until fully healed. And then dislocate the shoulder and clean it properly as long as it is sane.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of shoulder dislocations: for I have told you how to approach these procedures now and from this point forward, the author.
des soros	moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	nature:screase: itape alement :waisse de ceure.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	ifrevelevantye:xifrance if12ndeurs in a clellementsente heit l forlethe t ieu.archeinthe totoxes (thisameiure,nquantioled cuitier nentralele claissansseigneurnecharellume in causeusce ilisharrexainciteuxaniferreraisseurs ifinceuse thekunt heuilecuscauseable:ibletifautiueauschausiveuises andieuvelaure.itimes
des scrophules	of scrofulous diseases
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Often it is performed at the neck, and on the scars, and in wounds, and never comes from elsewhere or carries disease, and they are very numerous and often similar to each other; there are those that contain moisture, and some malignant ones that do not obey health. In which case you see a good disposition of the skin, and it is like the color of the corpse, and silent in every part and not separated from the nerves or arteries, nor is it hollow; therefore it must be scraped above and each part scraped, and two fingers are used to scrape near the throat, as we have said about the chief incision; and they go lightly and gently so that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor make a gaping mouth, which hinders the hands from moving.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you scrape the vein or artery and it prevents healing, then apply a vitriol mixture or any powder that staunches blood, and restrain the wound; let the incision be soothed and softened first, and begin to treat it; then do what your work demands until there are no small scrophulous lumps left, which you must scrape and squee Written by:
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have completely removed the scrophulae (leprosy), it is required that you join together the two upper lips of the ulcer and bind them tightly; then because there is no delay due to its size for the large leprosy. It is required that you understand how to cover the root of it, and dig deeply, and cut as we have said. Those scrophulae with superfluous amount will bleed excessively when opened or they will die; and in this way, like before mentioned, after depending, then treat them with ointment and similar things so that what is left from the corruption does not become contaminated; and when the ulcer has been well cleaned, it is cured by applying ointment continuously until healed.
de squinance	Of scrofula (tuberculous lymphadenitis)
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old said and spoke about the making of a necklace; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is what they wrote about their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have scrofula, it is required that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed; and we do not help with this because all the veins and arteries in the malady are found in those who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in .ij. almonds (presumably referring to lymph nodes).
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the vein, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid the death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is required, however, that when we want to cut the epiglottis, we do so in circles or four small holes around the two circles or according to the size of the opening, not on a map (likely referring to making precise and measured cuts).
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and that they are covered with the section of the epiglottis which has no blood supply, and the vein is long from its end.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cut the membrane so that it shrinks in the neck; and remove the veins filled with blood, if you see nothing at all, and then make the opening as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the division of the lymph in the neck where it hurts when the ruptured vein flows through the opening.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound a little bit open.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is no doubt of strangulation, assemble the two upper lips of the cut membrane and bind it tightly according to the map (presumably referring to precise binding); then apply medicines that produce blood flow so long as healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Alabasters say that they do not act so much as the throat is completely burned, and the maladies are judged dead by their nakedness (presumably referring to scrofula causing severe tissue damage and the exposed condition of the wound/ulcer).
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Now comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file:
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this purpose, they command the patient to leave the wound uncovered until the malaise of the illness has passed, and it is passed in either two or three years.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And moreover they command to stitch up the wound and heal it as long as it was treated.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took an axe and struck her throat, and split the neck open with one blow.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I went to call for them to heal her, but she was already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that had been let out of it, and it was evident that she hadn't covered her neck or carried anything but the throat; this came from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and stitched up the wound, and healed it until it was healthy again.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And there was nothing unusual about her voice after she had been made well, and returned to her normal condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Because of this I can say that in the mending of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This is called "hernia of the throat," and it's one of the great afflictions in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And according to two ways: natural causes or simply no cause at all.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two ways: one resembles fat people, and the other way resembles an affliction that comes from our arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And he has no fear, and does not have to perform dangerous operations only on small ones; instead, he tries and searches for solutions throughout the entire body.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you treat it as though it were a fat person and have no voice at all, then do as we do with our own bodies, and search throughout the entire body for any sign of improvement.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And thoroughly investigate it, and treat it as required until it is perfectly healthy again.
des nous	in our bodies.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to us (humans), and I will tell you all the similarities.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is my duty to explain every difference that exists between us and others.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and heat are present as long as the inflammation continues, and it is completed by suppuration; however, when the fever subsides and the heat cools down, there may be relief for the patient.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Without fever or pain and contains a swelling that is its own bag, which changes in the same way as the color of blood vessels. It also begins to be like a fat person, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they correspond to the two types I mentioned earlier, either fat, or moisture-related, just as I described in terms of blood circulation.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It requires, when you come to the treatment of this joint, that you first test and examine all the instruments called "dislocation instrument", according to what shape is prescribed by the author who follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of examining abscesses in ours requires that you moisten the wound more than you open it when treating an abscess, and turn your instruments slightly and repeatedly, until you know whether the patient feels pain, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the dislocation instrument and be careful that it is not too strong.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the joint is dampened and its color changes as I have mentioned with other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And after the dislocation instrument comes moistening, you will know it is inflamed if then it begins to cross over (implying a change in movement), and take it with pinches, and scrap off each part lightly and bind it with a sling so that you may remove it cleanly from the joint.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot remove it cleanly, then take it apart piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it remains in any way, then we will encounter it many times again.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it lingers a little while, and does not trouble you, then use various corrosive powders to treat the wound, bind the abscess, apply calming remedies for the abscess, and continue other treatments until he is sound.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if they are great, he takes two fingers from each side of the wound, and treats that which inflames it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is contrary or different to what he hastes and applies hot vitriol upon it, leaving two days or three depending on the wound's discharge, so that the exudation subsides; then return to cover that which was delayed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the convoluted forms of instruments that confound us, consisting of three kinds: large and long; and there are three quarters called "albaret", and one called "breb"; and we find three other kinds: large, long, and small, in order to seek out the abscesses' openings.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles used by witches, and they are made of copper, iron, or silver, and their value corresponds to those that are yellowish-colored, and they are better suited for seeking out the cysts' openings.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three kinds: large, long, and small, depending on the size of the cysts' openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the cysts are very similar to what you see here: large, long, and small; and if there are cysts with two or three layers also in this manner.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are cysts with two or three layers and they also have this number of layers; and if there are cysts with a single layer and these also have three kinds, and all need to be considered in their treatment.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The leader of these does so much that he cuts into them, and there are others who do not cut at all but only scrape from one side in order to draw out the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these instruments are returned in handholds so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three kinds: large, small, and long, just as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And none of them are used for anything other than the cut vein and joints, just like legs, arms, breasts, and shoulders, in similar shapes.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And there is never made any other small instrument resembling abscess openings in this manner, to draw out the exuding sanguineous fluid.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is never placed in any healthy vein to draw blood from the veins or arteries, nor are they arranged in this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	No one has inflamed any of the breasts when those patients begin to become perforated, as long as they appear like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And they remain swollen and fleshy, and whoever tries to heal them must do according to this form of the line B: from G... (this part is incomplete and needs further context or reference for accurate completion).
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scoops out the fat, and applies medication that causes inflammation to the wound, then sews up two fingers from each side of the wound, as long as it heals.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the patient is discomforted for large veins, and it haste, et l’esle (the maltrete que les choses, por ceu que il leu ache.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	: the same: asume leu : aze theu theu ;sure it'ou :age : "theu-up. Ite theu (itau :lorecause.old.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	12it secrete,ete apece sentence.socramount siageseur thatchènde,ic presure,secexaccomprectre,re itany soifressec etentouchectezet ilessexse.c avientes.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not cleaned, or the incision is not completely made, because the maladies do not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton coated in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it bleed as much as possible into the remaining tissue and fat, then heals until it is healthy again.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses in wounds
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the sores are hard lumps or contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	And thus those containing moisture must be dried according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole bag of pus in the abscess is drained, then fill the wound with plenty of moistened cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton and cure the area with an agreeable ointment until it is healthy again.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like those of erysipelas, then treat them as we have described for breaking open sores, and if it has a bag of pus, apply cautery in the manner we have previously mentioned.
de la routure de l’artere	of the artery removal process
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is passed, and the skin is sewn above it, many times it leads to punctures underneath, as well as from the incision on top;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows when it is for the artery, then there are long hairs pricked by the punctures;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you sense it at your discretion, you feel one-third extraction; and when for the vein, there are returns four times coming forth;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to treat this puncture; and immediately when it is below the slabs and underground, near the neck, and there is much of other things, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It therefore requires to avoid the iron treatment, and those who are at the head must also avoid it, and in those whose artery is swollen above the hairy patch;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work is done with the needles, and the artery remains uncovered until it is discovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then you insert there a needle, and make it pierce just on the other side, and hold back the artery with a double thread of leather in two places, as I have indicated to you in the removal of those arteries which are within temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then let there be no lack between the two threads of an intermittingly inserted instrument until it enters without impediment which one it is; and if it is delimited by an incision, so the puncture occurs;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then adjust the treatment so that it becomes loose, until the thread moves in the flesh where it is inserted;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then take care of that infection coming forth therein, as long as it is sound;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if the puncture is in the vein of the skin, it requires that you rub your hand where the puncture is on the entirety of the skin;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then insert the needle where you hold it in your hand, and make it pierce, and put a double thread thereof to draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then cut into the incision, as I told you, or the thread of one part through two parts of the nerve;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not there, then reinsert an additional needle into all one of the threads throughout the whole incision from the first needle's puncture, and hold the three threads steady.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then close the incision as much as it leaks out, then close the excess and leave what is already stitched.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cover it with a cloth moistened in wine and oil, and provide the patient with treatments of tenting and ointments until he is healthy again.
des apostemes des ners	punctures of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also when punctures occur in the artery and vein, punctures of nerves happen when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with assistive devices and braces in various applications, resulting in such grievous punctures that the skin's color resembles a bruised cornea, along with multiple other discomforting conditions.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when we form the stitches, if it causes severe pain, and is not located near the cornea but rather in the surrounding area.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and from all sides, ensuring it doesn't advance or recede, neither up nor down, and the one in contact with the wounds does not need to cover it with metal: sometimes such movement may lead to a contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that individual who is either the head or forehead, performs the eyelid massage with the stylus.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the punctures are small, and you have some fine pincers, then grasp it at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it's large, then let it be suspended at the incision site, and scrape away any debris, treat the bone and join the wound with sutures, continuing care until healing is restored.
des grosses boces pendans	of large hanging bags
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	sele.sanginique.sententice.arme toutilamexse aupexaudexence siage vatas coudre (anatomique thatchale,isse. Solengesse.age.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I see. I saw a man who had two bellies that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference in them; they were white, had thin roots, and were split open, and soon became swollen with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I made it and found in one case seventeen ounces, and in the other twenty-six. And regarding its operations during incision: you must observe that the patient's maladies are moist, the color of the artery is pale and moist with delicate roots.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the caulker is wide, and they are in your presence with the fire cautery. For at the cutting board many times there are too large bleedings of blood, and if it does not stop by itself, then you must hurry to the cauterist;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient's expectancy and fear of the iron cautery, then take a well-made thin thread and tie it around the artery as we have said, and let it remain for two years;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restraint, and continue to tighten the thin thread around the artery until it presses on it, and he suffers pain; if the roots are thick, you fear cutting into him immediately in his belly, but you can still cover most of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then you cauterize without releasing it; then treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the artery which is of dark color, poorly felt, and resembles milk:
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an infection increased, and I will come back for the treatment of this ulcer afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil bursts forth;
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of boils comes from cautery or a fissure on the wound or skin, and it is in the abdomen and also occurs among the lungs, as happens in other procedures, or from bleeding that cuts into veins or arteries according to what is mentioned before, or pneumothorax;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is through the procedure of fissure and from the discharge of boils, the color of the incision resembles that of red coral, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestinal discharge, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed to its sides, it rebounds, and then returns, and sometimes it forms scars, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when pressed with the hand, not restricting at all; and if it is from blood, then the incision appears large and hard, and is cut according to the amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is pneumothorax, then it's swollen on the chest, and the procedures are such that you should observe whether the appearance is due to artery bleeding, or vein bleeding, or pneumothorax.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is important that you leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you about artery and vein incisions.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to intestinal discharge or boils, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie their left arm, and stretch it out straight, then sign at every part of the boil.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	and then he commands to lie leaning on your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then goes around the wound that you have stamped all over.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	and most of the incision is above all the large artery;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then let the wound edges be bound with a strong thread or a tightly knotted silk cord, and firmly tie it up.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then the part of the incision is extended over the suture, and you apply your desired medicinal substance, and ask for the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you tighten the suture well, it will loosen and you should insert the intestines into the abdomen's cavity.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you tighten the stitches, it will take on an inflammation, and relieve excess fluid.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the arrow pierces or the vein is contrary to it, then you will gently enter with a lancet, and return to your work and take two fine needles, and you should tie them together with a thread that you have previously made, and fasten the needles through those places where you have done the incision.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then the incision is tightened with four fine needles along the incisions, and if you see movement, remove the needles, leaving them there until they penetrate (as a sign of healing), and cause death by self-inflicted harm.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you should cover it when it is slightly inflamed and in the process of healing, then treat that which must be done with it, and close the incision as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood or fluid that you tighten, then treat the site with what it requires, and sew up the site.
dou chancre	Two ulcers
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said about the divisions of chancres, and how to treat them with medicines, and about preventing their cure by fire; and let us say that inflamed chancre has in the marrow, and great caution is required for its treatment, and they said the ancient that when a chancre is in the flesh or can be removed so as if it were on mammaries, and in the limbs, and must you not remove it all when it is at the beginning of the occurrence; and when it is large and old, do not bring near, for I have never seen any healers cure them, nor has anyone ever treated them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	sangles fromage.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division of edema
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Treat the patient kindly with his hands
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then check if the edema is toward the intestines: it must be pierced in the abdomen from both sides of the belly button; and if the edema is due to liver disease, the incision should be made on the left side of the abdomen 2 inches below the belly button; and if it's due to inflammation, the incision should be on the right side, and there is no need that the patient lies over the fissure where excessive fluids may drain into his weakened state.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce through the entire layer with the instrument and release it, then hold the sponge at all points as if scraping to remove a small amount of fluid or inject it; continue piercing until the sponge reaches the bottom eight inches, which is where the water accumulates; it resembles an extremely thin silver needle with one tiny hole in one part, and another three holes in another part, forming this shape: and carved like a feather on one side, and on the other three sides, each of different sizes. This incision's shape is described by medieval scribes as being similar to that of a quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top of this layer is the abdominal wall, when the fluid returns to it with the instrument; remove most or one-third of the fluid, because if you draw out more than what is necessary for that hour, perhaps he dies from exhaustion of his spirit due to the treatment of his wounds, or his palms are swollen, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	andre comment.sesmeplein lait d’ancrepeur malice duermainmeidresume thetoute pate. In 1020means queilthej'sue tounsoldere.meantain-a, ilte: apremailles of theure andre:sentence lai. Aire quatime quellace in French fromentail. Commentaire.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do not do this for any day, and keep from moisture until it stops but with just a little water. And if you doubt on the malady, and you pour much water into it, then bury or sandy baths or soak in warmth and sunshine, and bleed or drink; and cure with dry medicines while he is sound, and cautery inside the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	The treatment of varicose veins.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	There have never been children born with no bulge in the vein, or that bulge is small and not located on its surface. If it must be determined immediately whether there is a cyst in any of these spaces: then place a fine thread underneocurrently subcutaneously; tie it and leave it for three to four years; when he wants to urinate, if it is closed, cut it and let him urinate, and then put it back. And sometimes there is no need for this because the urine that comes out does not close the wound.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the small bulge is treated with a thin layer of plaster as we have said, it will grow larger. Those who do not have the bulge on their vein are bleached, because no one is born with a bulge at the head of the vein, so they cannot urinate until they tie up their vein in front; and they cannot void because the material cannot reach just below the skin level, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this work is that the maladies sit softly on their backs, and the head of the vein and the cope are also as small as a penny's size, so that the bulge presses down in the middle; and keep from bleeding blood which comes often, and if it does occur, wash and treat the wound until healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pustule of the vein.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times alabaths appear in the vein, and it is a disgusting appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; he must treat them with an ointment of one centimeter thickness, coat both cope and bulge, then place moist cotton soaked in Egyptian oil treatment on the swelling until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the alabath is cancerous and bloody, then you must bring in a cautery; when you have coated it, and if it is on the vein, and has part inside the thigh and part outside, then you must cut the alabath which is inside first; and when healed, then treat the rest. For as long as you treat it all together, they are not assured that it will be seen or perforated in the vein, and blackening and corruption on his thigh, so: for every thing that is black and corruptible, bind under a plaster made of honey and flour mixed with several horse chestnuts' bark; then treat with other cures until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	nac thexion. What toloreinthe:sical,croit:theu thefartis itens : ​demesaufeithreidextemplette.sure ache tails:screment (orseiudexume:3000sesme:troles.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is painful to deal with this matter, it requires that you scrape at one small spot on the head of the arrow and of the thigh; then cleanly separate between them, and apply a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water so that it does not stick back.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not painful compared to other wounds; however, in all our doing of this work by our will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we perform the better work, and the most easily leading to salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not mention circumcision for their children because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision in those days; they used force, and in one small piece; if it hurt them so much that they had two sores there, and perhaps we sometimes cut above it and delayed the healing process.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery after cautery is painful, and it causes doubled pain; and in the rehabilitation of that spot on which there is no guarantee that the pointed finger will not bleed again; and during the healing of the finger joint, by chance the iron may come back into it, and injure its work and many times arise.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the demonstration made with force on all parts of the thread I found the benefit of the experiment, because the forces cut exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	When you press your hand, if the thread is cut evenly into .i. one hundred teeth; but that the fibre is firmly inserted into the skin; and it is done in such a way that the first operation makes the child think, if they understand, that you are only joining the filament around the stick, and not forcing it in any other ways.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you make the movement with your hands straight and push the forces between your fingers or on your fingers so that the child does not see them, neither one of us; then you put your hand on the stick and blow or smoke it until the thread around the stick is fully drawn up; then cleanse well the dirt assembled therein, and tie a double string to the spool's eye; then bind .i. hundred times with .i. other rope; and I give you in the second layer under the pocket and the seamstick, and lift between the .ij. layers quickly, and pull up the head of the stick.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow a little and a little, because it is one of his medicines; and put powder on top and on top of the paste mixed with a new moist chickens' egg baked well without adding water, fried with good olive oil and rosemary, and leave it for another day, and cure it with other curing until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The formations of force during the process if this is that the two sticks are held tight and stretched, and they are as great as your hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the process occurs when there is a division within the fibres during cutting; therefore, it requires that you extend to your one piece so that the string makes an impression; and you copy equally, and if you cannot hold onto your one, then let it be with pliers, and then cope equally.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass .iij. years, and that which is on the stick is burnt, then leave it until the brazen spikes are smoothed out, and scrape it lightly; if you pull it so as you can, and do not harm the part of the stick, thus neither will it harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure now the wounds with things we have said or treated in pills, and if it causes pain beyond measure, and it goes upward without harming, care for it as we have mentioned, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine may be due to an obstruction in the urethra, or a frozen bladder, or bowel obstruction, or similar things that we have mentioned in this section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not released, and you observe that the retention is due to an obstruction in the urethra or at the neck of the bladder, it dictates that the patient be laid down on his knees, with a pad underneran his back, extend his belly from above the spine, and restrain him as much as possible; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to express through the urethra upwards, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must amend extraction with all instruments called "syringe," for this is its form: let it be silver finely wire-wound like a bird' mantle; or a thin one of palm length and a half. Or slender at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way of releasing the urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it around the head with some wool or cotton. Insert the thread through the syringe, then discard any excess wool and continue pushing the thread up to the head of the syringe; oint the syringe with oil or fat and beadle the patient on a chair, raise the bladder and urethra with moistened linen and olive oil.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then repeatedly insert the syringe into the penis, so that it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis above the bladder. Insert the syringe before the bladder and let you hear the patient' mantle come to the voided thing immediately; this is not done according to this order unless because as long as we lead it goes in a twisted manner. Then cut the thread of wool little by little, and then the urine follows the wool, straighten it out, and let the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the syringe as long as the bladder is voided, and secure the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When excretions or blood come into the bladder, and you see debris assembled there, and you observe fluid and medicines coming out, then apply all to the instrument called "clamp," which is its form: it should be a silver wire fine as a bird's mantle.
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	She is closed, and if there are .iij. perforations: .ii. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you can observe; and let the medicine be applied to it so that it pushes the urethra well, and at a suitable time release the moisture.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	the urine. Enliges as il vein, siens demeil veintaine laurentainne lains.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	inspection. Elder. Sirén enception laisseraigne the tithes (10ain. A,representation ofin fromage. Iaccomprehence. Lauren. Anger aedean: �tie. Andresignsure.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or iron, and the shoulder higher; then take a sheep's bladder and put therein the moisture which you see for clistering that bladder, then tie between the two breasts with a good thin thread, and heat a little of that moisture on the fire; then pour the clyster into the arm by the vein, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an oval hole in it; then push a strong thread into these holes roundly; assemble the circle as one would with a dalmatic, and put therein oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done for the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture has reached the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of techniques for piercing and extracting medicines; I have spoken about the difference between joint piercings as rain-stones, and all the signs, and how on such stones one must work with size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone pierced in the bladder often occurs in children, and it is a sign that the water jump of the bladder seems like water in its subtlety; and then there are many bleeding veins, and quite painful his malady arm, and he twists many times, and then there are deep fissures; and the treatment of these jumps is light until they reach three years old, and it is very grievous in old people, and is moist for those who are between juncture and old age; and cure is lighter for those with large piercings than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with clyster, in order to remove all the filth that has accumulated in the intestines; because sometimes this can obstruct the piercing.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by his limbs, and lift him up to the side, so that the piercing descends to the lower part of the bladder, and it never rises above its original level; then place him between your hands on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely deflating downward; then squeeze and touch all around.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the piercing in the space, then immediately stop your cautery above the piercing. And if it does not tighten at all when touched all around, put oil on the index finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your own age, if the patient has completed his youth; and you pour it into its foundation, and check the piercing, and when you feel it near the neck of the bladder; then push down at that point, and as soon as you see the tissue coming up, immediately release.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	On theere preses. Etil'lundre lices diz auge uniface a peche fornage laissez les che. Etal of thepremer. Sce neuf inxel oire itin aoutte, le. Anderet thelement. Ifleu in thefaire. Le temps. Outleture duesmele.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And makes between that which is between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the moisture; and it should be placed above the wound, and then either to the bone or the foundation, and let it have a thickness as long as necessary, and narrowed inside according to the size of the wound, without being too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	In case the bandage needs to be on the bone or foundation, it must spring with work; and you know that there is either a hole in it or angles and margins: if it has teeth for pulling out; and if it is placed underneath, similar to a gland, and round, where its exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Since it has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it doesn't spring, you must stretch out with tongs that are similar to a chisel at the top, in order to extract the wound so that it does not collapse; or push underneath an instrument slenderly curved at the top; and if you cannot insert it there, then make the hole slightly larger, and if the cortex is still present, strain with molten glass.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one wound, first push the largest into the neck of the bladder, then pierce it, and force it through, and handle the smaller ones afterward if there are more. And if she is very large, you must cover her with socks, and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes out in such a way that the holes cannot be closed; but always try to pull out the wound by pieces using tongs or pliers as much as possible.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and strain it, and cover him above with a moistened linen cloth in oil and wine, or olive oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess. Then re-soak the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the following day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, rise well the patient's limb in oil and water, then treat him with lime (calcium oxide) ointment and basil (an antiseptic herb) until he is healthy again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the abscess in the wound and deposits of blood clots form in the bladder, and it is retained by urine, which drips as if from a spring with the urine: then press down on that clot within the wound, and pull out the clotting tissue, because if it remains, it will damage the bladder and cause bleeding.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then lift the wound with water and salt and clay, and help it in all ways that you know, until he is healthy again; and be sure to wrap all the bandages around his hips, and assemble the medicines on top of the dressing.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the wound is small and it is located in a vein, and drawn out from the same way; I have proved this treatment many times before, so excuse for such a procedure.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	In oldencis and siens:nce estraicts d’orii theurther ijour leu eauctice nainthirstin. The Old English, in itinerioren ofte theurge thetrois enimlenglish translation en français. Iesurge tounge French.ean.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a fine filament and pass it along the edge of the wound above the stone, so that it cannot slip into the bladder; then thrust the needle lightly into the vein, until it penetrates the stone; turn the needle in your hand repeatedly inside the stone little by little, as much as you can pierce the other side of the stone. If at once urine comes out, press your hand on that part which is still stuck to the stone within the vein. Then it will be broken and jump with the urine, and give great pain to the patient.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, take a filament inside the stone and another above it, then make a cut in the place of the stone between the two links, thrust the arrow firmly, loosen the link, melt the frozen blood which is in the wound, and treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	From the wounds of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare for the wound to be infected in women, and if it does happen, it is a serious illness; and there are three reasons for this: one being that by chance the woman becomes unmarried; and the second reason is that it is difficult to find a well-informed woman who can show her face.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that by chance it is difficult to find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that wounds on women are more extensive than those on men, which requires deeper cutting for treatment, and therefore causes great fear for the patient.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if such measures are necessary, it is required that you choose a knowledgeable midwife and in cases where there is no one available, do not seek out a subtle woman of high status; rather present someone who has good skills in women's health or a woman who knows at least part of the art, and command her to perform what you have ordered for the inspection of the wound.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And look carefully if the woman is virginal: then it must be supported with its foundation and inspect the wound; and if she attempts to treat it, constrain her inside that structure, and recommend that she support or press it with her left hand on the bladder's surface.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	. La :entire.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then cast the rag in size, if you feel the wound so close it that the hole can extract far, and know that there are many types of piercing: namely small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with spikes. Know their appearances to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it does not heal on its own, then place vitriolic borax at the wound and leave it for an hour until the wound is no longer bleeding; then return to your work, as long as the hole remains open, and use those tools that I have told you about in piercing extraction, which we will assist you with.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not heal on its own, and it is an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder to the wound and strain of tent staples and bandages, and no longer attempt to reopen or extract from it, but leave it alone, knowing that the patient may unfortunately die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed down and the patient's pulse returns, then return to your work, as long as the hole remains open.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia (a protrusion of an organ through the wall that normally contains it)
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rice of this kind is nothing other than a mixture of moisture or white foam, which is the core of the liquid that contains the egg yolk; and it is called "foam", and there are times when it is not properly in the web of the yolk, if we take care that it is something else; and this is the skin of the yolk between the white foam that we have mentioned, and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And this formation of that kind is fragile and comes out with the liquid; its matter expands.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there are times when it comes from percussion on the liquids, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color descending towards yellow, or without red, or black, or blue-white, and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And this is the sign of knowing that assembly, because if it is the white foam we have mentioned, then they are reopenings, like an opening somewhat long as it resembles a wound, and it does not open the liquids, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture within its own web, then these are the reopenings with a part of the yolk, and for this reason we think it is another kind of treatment.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and sanc.esmeur quil: entor leu espece, dant queil se desormanier malhevel en cestin fievrever vianfere.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the interposition, judge who is within there.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure them with iron, it is required that the sick man be healed as much as possible and the filling of his heart; then we place him on his back over something slightly elevated, and put a lot of soft coverings on him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then place him on his left side, and command the minister that he places him on the right hand, and extend the rod to one of the two sides where the kidneys are located.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and cover the kidneys with their skin from near to the end until next to the thorn, and cut it all straight in considering whether the skin of the kidneys is white enough, and scrape gently as required.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the skin of water with one large puncture, and extract all the water, and then put onions on it, and raise the skin upwards; do not touch the kidneys but just their skin, cut the side gently by pieces so that you don't harm the meat, if you break it well, the water will return to him.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the water rises for your work, then reseat in his skin after you have completed the work on the skin of the kidneys; then join the two stones (believing them to represent the kidneys) with a bandage, and cure it as you do with other wounds, until he is sound again.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you correct the corrupted water of another illness, it is required that you place the vessels (vasselz) that are hanging suspended in doubt as to whether there will be a discharge of blood; then pierce the kidney with all the suspended vessels, and extract the water, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is assembled in two parts together, you know they are stones; if you pierce the other part as you have done with the first one, then draw out the blood from it, and put linen soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another thin linen soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the stones, and hang doubled clothes on them, and lay it upon all of him that ito's form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of cloth, and the woolen threads according to this appearance, and assemble them in the hollow of the breechclout at the thighs, and one piece goes from the foundation up to the back, and the other on the waist part; and the second pair goes above the two ankles, and all the rest is gathered into the belt loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And there is no medicine for this rods of fire cautery in size iron, and you must use one fine steel scalpel, coat the skin around the joints, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance containing water becomes exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white substance at once, and scour with this fine cautery hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cope in all ways you can, so that you cover everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch the skin; and know that this work is safer; and keep from letting blood flow during operations, and movements of the blade.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything hinders you, or causes blood loss or any other thing, treat that which hinders you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, make an incision as I told you, and be sure that when you are well-informed by our meanings that such a procedure is necessary.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Make the patient lie on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the area around all the tissues involved, and make the incision long enough for the cautery to go through; and widen it so that all the water flows out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound and bind it, and let the remaining water in the wound flow, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the blood does not come out of the wound mouth, you must pierce with a pin or the instrument used to drain the fluid from abscesses in such cases; and slightly expand the wound, and be aware that the fluid returns, and within two months or so check it again, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will no longer suffer.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscesses on the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this part of this rod there are many dangers, because it seems to me that you should leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the work and similarities of the incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say that most abscesses come from joints and mainly around them; and it is in many cases so.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It's to know by surplus moisture and fluid which is expanded around the joints, or by impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And is the color of the incision according to the color of the artery; and it does not cause pain, and the incision is severe.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes there are stuck and painful, and straw-colored incisions, and rarely it comes from another artery or the vein's swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from our arteries, if it is cut by the position of the incision, when you press on your side.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And does not require that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from the swelling of a vein is cut by its position where one should apply pressure on their side.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	And it can well make incisions at this appearance, and in others as well.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you remove the clot of the blood, then it rises to the top, and the thread becomes white-filled, and releases the suspensory from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already filled with these needs, then it requires that you draw out the vein and remove the clot.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is in the thread or within the valves, then it requires that you release all of the vein and make the cut roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the wound is behind it, then it requires that you remove all of the vein and extract the clot, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply clean cotton cloth soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, and then attend to other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the incision of clots/clotting
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	It is an incision wrapped in something that appears to be like a boil, with the softening of clots/clotting.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	And if it murmurs painfully when it moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and this treatment is also well-suited for such a condition as we have said before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And in the work of him, according to what they did formerly.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	and armor aliai quintes encorte de laissae ailne aureen.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	ilesle lou en oun. T'entail aes:mesure.ailex laissage, leisque aelocise apresages. Ips :er theuille. Ilice mesuraine. Journe:2i lesire deale nule andre deca:   :ilicate.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then strike deeply at the shoulder blades wide to the bottom of that place, where the bones are exposed, until they are uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then tear from one piece, as we have said in the extraction of arteries located in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts a needle or has one with two threads, and attaches it to the first point where it has come through, and from there to the other chief.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then they push straightly according to the length of the cord, and draw out the corroded moisturizers.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as we have treated others, if no veins are found that will not receive one of the cords.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this there is no harm done, and if the veins receive blood, it must be drawn from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	if the vein does not lose its resistance from the incisions of the vessels, and they do not help each other.
de la routure dou syfac	regarding the routine of surgery
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The amendment to this operation is by the cutting that comes from or affects surgery, or extension on the abdomen in the part of the groin, as it allows the intestines to descend from that routine pathway into one of the cords.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this routine is either related to surgery or its extension, and these various methods come from many causes: by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting a heavy burden, and so on.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and when it comes to this extension of the surgical routine, it happens little by little over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is the abscesses identical to this route as far as reaching the body's core, because the surgical routine pressures the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are as it is related to this surgical routine that makes the abrupt pain begin at its beginning and causes different appearances on the skin near it, and it's due to the exit of the intestines and the cord again.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	illement :comme laisse: a laisser demelelaterre lesen. Aixentures offerre theire:xentere quatrains. The-saintintrescribe. Alludextrait. It'sre andir, anderasure. Andresigniforceur, in:re.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with fire for pain, since it cannot be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of the work is that you command or tell him to draw out the intestines into his hand inside the wound if he can reinsert them.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then simply push down on his neck. Between your hands, and hold the claws.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then it goes back to above, and covers all the skin of the joints long.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then place small stones near the lower abdomen according to your experience for opening the wound, and such that it allows him to exit.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the surface of the skin of the joints so that the white part is exposed from all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then place your finger in such a way that you teach the intestine, which is between the white surface under the skin of the abdomen and between the second surface.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and that which is behind the abdomen, and between the second surface, and push it to the right hand inside the joint of the intestines, and the white surface is on top in your left hand, and lift the abdomen toward the skin over the joints.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and you will ask if he has any intestines wrapped around or white surface exposed long, and if not, then put it in the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or have it (assuming "i" refers to an individual with some tools), and put it in the back part of the white surface after the skin of the joints, behind the abdomen, and cover the ends of the intestines that appear from the threads after the bellybutton; after the waist, then bind the claws until there are three threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then put them together in the way of a cross, and cover it such that we have said is under the skin of the joints, of a strong chain of III parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the shoulders in bandages, and make parts of it two inches wide, so that no one can see into them with their hands, unless a hole is made.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place the suture mainly according to the first one two inches long, and after these two inches let there be enough space where the skin is tightened so much that it prevents the movement of the joints by a great deal.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all the rest according to the roundness it has; then close in the part that is inside the skin of the joints, as much as you can without compressing and bowing, just as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply a warm linen in oil, and dress the wound, and treat the suture that we mentioned earlier.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And there is no occasion to cauterize the white spaces we have mentioned after the incision, due to doubt of blood flowing out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For it happens many times, and let the suture hang until it tears; if it delays in tearing, then wash it with hot water and place it as we have said until it tears.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then care for the wound using other treatments, so that it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of inguinal hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this manner I have never seen anyone attempt to treat with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made in such a manner as to wrap so tightly around the shoulders, after removing them from their joints slightly.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then dress the wound in meadow grass and care for the abscess that occurs there, until the shoulders no longer feel pain; and treat it as we have said, so long as they are healed perfectly.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	There has never been a case of groin hernia as we have said, and open the lining; and if any part of the bowels comes out, it is only slight, and return everything to normal.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in all other cases, if it delays too much at this point, they believe the wound or phlegmatic condition, until the bowels come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens by the extension of the suture that is in the groin, just as we have said, because it stretches out, then becomes soft and swollen, and opens up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment is by cauterization, just as we have previously stated; and there has never been a case treated with fire in this manner.
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And it is that the painful spasms occur between one's hands, then dress the enlarged portion of the groin according to the amount of two inches.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and seize .iij. jours de cest les chifre dous quinque vassel of .iij. coment in fievre un peuvelses.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And with pressure on the abdomen, then they press the two points appearing above the head of the ribs, and press them both together;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the rib, and do not cover the facet nor stretch the belly or anything else as I have told you in the treatment of dislocating the bowels.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then care for it with wound care. And when you sew the threads, if the patient bleeds and heals the wound as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The facet is constricted and has no appearance in the procedure, and the cautery becomes more profound in this manner, and it approaches salvation soon afterward.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the joints is softened in no one person because the materials within are softened, and it becomes noticeable; and it's necessary when we want to cure, that the malformed lie on their back, and the softened skin is covered with natural skin; then assembled the two lips into a stitch, and if you see, remove the superfluous softened skin from two or three stitches tightly; then suture between the stitches, and cure it as for other wounds, until it heals completely, and tie the thread.
dou chastrement	joint manipulation
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The act of joint manipulation is recognized in our law, and therefore I would prefer that we do not mention it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: one being that the judge responds to questions concerning him when asked about his treatment, and concerning his cure; and the other reason because we often have experience with joint manipulation of various animals to assist us, such as deer, sheep, goat, etc. Therefore, I say that joint manipulation is done according to these two methods: either by attraction or by fracture. In the method where we do it by attraction, we lay the animal on a warm bed until the cartilage becomes soft and while; then you touch with your hand, so they are restored and no longer feel them. Regarding joint manipulation of trimming: make sure to dress the animal, pressing its skin folds with your left hand, then tie the suspensory band, and tuck it under each one of those five knots when you have thoroughly scraped it; and this method of joint manipulation is different from that by attraction because, in the attraction, chance may occur to any cartilage on the limbs. And this method of treatment is done so long as it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism is according to some ways: one being that between the two organs as openly as a woman's figure has hair, and sometimes it also excretes urine. And the other way is in women, like a rod and two organs. The care of the body and soul is that you attend to all accompanying conditions, and treat them as for other wounds; in the second manner, those from whom the urine leaks through their skin around the organs, without any cure.
de la tentigene	Of tempting nature
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tempting nature is an excess on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and many women have had it like a hand, and it's the care. It requires that you trim the superfluous temptation in your hands or fingers, and handle them lightly; and do not go too far, for the blood does not vanish, then treat with other cures until he is well; and there is another thing which nips at the mouth of a mare, and it burns, and according to its appearance they called the old "malady kowee." It requires that you deal with temptation, as we have said about tempting nature, and care for it while it is healthy.
de erratique	Erratic (in this context) refers to a phenomenon or behavior that is irregular, unpredictable, and not consistent with normal patterns. It often implies deviation from the norm in biological, physiological, or psychological processes. In historical texts about medical conditions, "de erratique" might describe abnormalities seen within specific disorders, such as hermaphroditism or other health issues wherein behaviors deviate from what is typically expected.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	: " : 13sanses deau:ent theor "Celturea French:0000 it'slake alexia 15:means in thetale (there20rse of it's, with0nous and thenne.
des emorroides	Of piles of dirt, for from such moisture the shoulder joint becomes dislocated, and it cannot move, and is malformed limbs; and sits heavy on sufferers great pain and injury.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Emorrhoids are fissures of veins that do not receive customary cauterization, and when they become old, then it becomes painful; we have said in our treatise on disorders that such emorrhoids resemble other diseases, and I shall now describe those which respond to treatment. I say that these emorrhoids, when formed inside the rectum, are not felt at all; they can be cured by iron. Those who find them in the rectal opening can feel them, and thus they can be treated. Therefore, you must place a woman in a cool house first; then stretch her legs above her knees, and apply cold compresses to her hemorrhoids, using remedies that contain dragon's blood and incense, similar things; then boil the pads for an hour, and immerse them in cold water; and then prepare a decoction of sumac bark, grenade skin, mulberry leaves, and other such things, and mix it with flour from barley, honey, and hay, and apply this poultice to her buttocks. If she scratches, it is beneficial. However, if not, she should use suction cups on the back of her buttocks and avoid injuring the mucous membranes; then take linen, dip it in plantain juice or blackberry juice with wine, and apply it to the spot. When the abscess settles down, you must treat the area until it heals. And those who are said to be "albathir" (red) have a rough appearance similar to that of an ulcer; and then this should also be treated.
des apostemes de la marris	Apothem refers to the centerline or axis of the triangle formed by the rectum's lining, which can become inflamed due to pressure changes or increased venous stasis in cases such as hemorrhoids or rectal abscesses. It is a critical anatomical feature that helps define the extent and nature of various pathological conditions affecting the anal region.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	ilesme en le jacquer.il aspeople laic:entrop:esque andre versal, lice aragon'sesera. Foris: 12. Andante tiointesca.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The first thing in this matter is to know the natural figure of childbirth; and if you see a woman pressing downwards towards her navel, and desiring odor from an arrow - indeed when these signs occur, it indicates that these children are born according to their natural figure, and each issue with its head first, followed by the second part with it; and when you observe such signs, one must gently press on the abdomen so that they be born quickly; for when he parts his head, this second part is also accompanied by him, and causes great pain from its superfluities through good molding; and those who come in other ways are not coming naturally. For it never comes with feet or shoulders, but rather with the chest and thighs, or on the back, or converted due to an accident near the neck, and by other unfortunate figures; this is why one must be experienced and subtle in these matters, aware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the figures that we should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes with its head first naturally, and the woman bears the pain during birth, and her strength is weak; then she should lie on a seat, or women hold her; and rising from her nature as oil or fenugreek which has been cooked, and then place the birthing between her legs in the shape of a little bowl:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Then cut the umbilical cord while holding his belly as much as possible to keep him from crying; and press on the woman's abdomen until he descends, and if he doesn't descend, then it is necessary to gently irrigate her with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil; then bind and sneeze out of position, and keep his hands and feet closed for an hour. Now the child will be fine. If those two hands come too hard, you must jerk them lightly and lightly; and if they cannot enter, place her on a chair, lift her legs up, and then remove the chair from the ground, and treat the woman so that she does not soil herself upon standing up; and if his hands do not enter and the child is dead, you must take hold of them with the implement placed before me and extract him, and jerk him out gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of a child from his legs
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When a child comes from his legs, it indicates that he should be placed upright;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slightly and slightly, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then proceed with the legs and slightly extend them;
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he just as quickly jump, if commanded to extend and make an external sign of discomfort?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps, let God decide;
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not happen as we have said, then turn it slightly and slightly, until it is natural in shape;
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For when there is ligamentous injury.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not happen as we have said, then apply a massage with oil, and soak in saline solution, and warm wax, and grind all together in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply it in accordance with the woman's natural anatomy hereafter;
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and it will settle in water until above the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when it is warmed above, apply a mirror of myrrh and place it above, letting it stay for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then let it settle on a bed, then make it jerk and hold its mouth and nostrils tightly, and press the abdomen gently, for now the child has jumped;
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the dislocation of the child's legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, it is placed with his hands slightly and slightly;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then it is supported on its neck, and let the legs hang down below, and lie on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	Then bend his hands slightly and slightly, and then press on his stomach above, holding the knees down inside until they are arranged below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child leu fiece preire quinzei desorme. Forte oun dexpression of demeans les poins anfeirr apei:suies enlere apresmoutre parole, or monsuranture d'alder. Leigh after thefaire de:n :ngeveintraire oferese decalle le monpreyfie (itgaveira. A:naturallyte luexentence tofere, Iapostructures lespointers,neverseurrement'stir feireanfeu offeraun.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	sle:tificates:lore, without (the.sanglesse iterrasinse deffis :13ime;e siens andefacape.comblexentiface.gauge,y’sseurieu laisseraignexente,astenent ca.semble presantessex a
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of fire cautery commands the Moor to let his hairs grow long and smooth; and if they pierce at their roots, he restrains them so that they do not move until they are born.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I wish for an engineer to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then lift up the woman and go forth.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, then make her lie down on a bed, and stretch out her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then I will instruct the muscle that I have told you about:
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not bear fruit, then make her sit on a chair, and study the method to bring back the hand:
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and we shape the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and she commands it that it be hiccuping as long as the infant cries:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's exit on its neck, and extending its hands, and turning its face towards its mother:
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I wish that the ball touches his hand, then turns it little by little, and the mother gently moves it:
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when he is equalized, if place on the upper muscle of a horse's body and oil it as we have said before, then she commands him to move little by little:
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to hiccup; then she sneezes:
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this manner for the second part:
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes into this manner for the second time, then take the thumb of your hand until all the moisture is drained:
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the infant cries with its face and neck raised, then wet it, so that it is not held back, and let the child cry:
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the infant within you as it should be required, and command to the woman that she does not hiccup again:
adonques si istra legierement.	however move gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins:
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and never do they give birth to three or four; and this is not extraordinary thing, and it rarely happens:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are extraordinary things, and they don't live for long if so.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply, and are deceived by the sucking which holds them to the breast, which is linked to their cry:
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never do they come out naturally as we have said before.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it is born with a cry, then the treatment we have said, and let the ball be subtle, and make its face quickly and gently as it moves:
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it must move to life.
de plusors enfans	of many children:
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	never formed in the marrow of an ivy, and they are all shaped by measure of his age, and made like a child:
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	androgène ence :encontre, de quintes.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	en lait leslors cest louer desires of theur estou in fichief:faire cié.aureau. ounce :le c'saint leavé.iractin theendures anding oferre deaf.  iewent,escuccrom, eruptedressure dureveint, ilk.
de l’enfant mort	:courre isle àn entorsextract. Cajte theire.en le la terre. Itures.dé les men.t :iurient cesar. :nure, tolore. Ies. Whatures cestreslai ence (thisens.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you heal the woman of the dead child or pregnant belly, as I have said in the previous section, and there are no signs of improvement, then you must engage in manual labor.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	And it is required that you know if the woman has sound virtue and does not have an accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	And it is required that the woman be heavily pregnant on her back, with legs elevated;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister should be in a quarantine of two parts, or she must remain in bed until her child is extracted without cesarean section;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then wash the mother's mouth with water mixed with myrrh and honey and seed of flax, then anoint her hands with these waters and myrrh.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then apply them lightly to the mother's wounds or abdomen if there are any visible injuries;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And make sure the child is dressed so that he can be delivered from his head first;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	Then stick them into her ears, neck, mouth, or throat, under the beard, or in her joints;
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if her labor pains are in the lower parts of her body, he should insert a lancet or a dagger into them or apply pressure to the sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is required that he should wear the instrument in his right hand, and put out the swelling between his left hand, and let him move all of ours. He shall weigh the pointed object therein (pointing:
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of the wart:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	and then find another wart, if you have experience with it, so that they are extracted in equal amounts.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then moved equally from one side to the other so that they can come out, and the wart teeth are held in place as it is shown here.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part, and he burns none of his two eyes in that area, and places the other part there, and removes the first part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if he remains in doubt, then place this wart or higher up, and do it as much until the entire thing falls out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull back for the tightening.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	since it requires that you wrap around something in a cloth, until everything falls out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then the cloth at the joining of the plant or the sole, and this requires that you do it with both hands, and on two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the shoulder of a child is large and it has been injured in its exit, or it has a swollen head.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	since it requires that you insert the thorn of the spinous between your fingers, and push on the head and extract the swelling.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you turn it to the instrument called "almidaj", for then its form comes with the spinal adjustments or by the chiropractor who is after that.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in this way also makes the child have a large natural head shape.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out for the bones with pliers.
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the shoulder jumps and is pulled to the board, until the moisture or the pus that has come out reaches it.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be removed, then cut the cloth into pieces and remove them as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the sides, then it requires that you pierce as much until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if the child is above his feet, then it has light attachment, and the treatments for earaches are lighter as well.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	and if it is inflamed in the abdomen or at the testicles, then it requires that you extract it from a cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make to the abdomen or the testicles as much until the moisture comes out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limb is broken, and the shoulder remains in place,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if you pour blood from the hand into the ear, and then pull it out of the ear.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then it pours one or two warts, and pulls them out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	but if the ear of the patient is not discharging blood that has come out, then it does not need to be worked upon.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	the same toximeurs, iaitnine century old age:
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	s’sse laisseigne 10vreurent an archentifreves,niteurs:turgichexinavantes.fyngel socance, hevacharicherres,animeletuscelle. çountreauxes himaldeucture.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the worm is on his side, and you put it back level, as we have said in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there is no possibility, then let the wound be divided into parts, and do not leave anything of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And upon accomplishment of this procedure, one shall adhere to what we have stated regarding the sutures that are applied on incisions which emerge from the marrow.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And in the event of bleeding arising, it is to be managed by confining the fluid with an aqua-restrictive approach and implementing additional therapeutic measures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I observed a woman with an abdomen wherein an infant was born alive; it is instructed to consider the previous issue and then refute the subsequent one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	Following extensive observation of the wound, an abscess formed and grew to the extent that it protruded from beneath the skin; this marks the onset of considerable complication.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I called for the remedy and contemplated extensively; yet I found no means to securely close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I positioned a heavy iron upon it with strong attraction; subsequently an ossification occurred after several days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I hesitated much for the reason that it lacked any internal osseous structure.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I surmised that it might be bones from a deceased child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I inspected the wound and manipulated bone with my hands as much as possible until her condition improved.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And then she remained at that time, and it became somewhat lighter in weight.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	Andre devised itentifieur l'anatomes desseigne laissiés de la vieille.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	gachource. For: Andromourelet de:surexent.cause, andreat ough:les.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	tantii goutifferre bise nomagelles.isecififereccarchean. iactheurgalloniscusisable. nde  :n’tifantioxifc:l'':dexthelang title,se taunt ifleur.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns are more subtle in restriction, and they are made of ivory or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And the mouth is wide enough to fit two spans and the margin of trees must be one and a half palms long.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And among these measures, this method must be adjusted such that they are firm in both directions, and one is half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these adjustments are made in the mouth of the metalwork when turning the two spans (presumably referring to a jaw or similar structure).
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of boxwood or ivory according to the shape of the tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And for the two jaws (presumably referring to the parts of tools or instruments being described), these adjustments must be one and a half palms long, and wide enough as you see fit.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see the metalwork opened at all parts of the instrument, it must sit with its base on one and a half palms long, while the legs are set outwards.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then place these adjustments together on the metalwork, and hold the head of the instrument between its hands.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hands on the entire instrument like you have made the tongs evenly ("igalment"), according to the quantity that opens the mouth of the metalwork ("la bouche de la marris"). As long as it holds well, that's all that matters.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these instruments are made of various shapes ("semblances"), and the more they appear (are represented or manufactured), the more difficult the work is to perform, and higher their value by quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not disdain the instrument that you have fashioned, because its needs are never unreasonable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage (presumably of creation or development) is reached during childbirth, it requires you to command the malady that she will keep her alane, and then make an incision in her face, and hold hands on her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps up so much, well then it is.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If it is not so, then he takes one pot, and makes a puncture or fistula, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the mare as if they were calming, rue, anise, chamomile, chicory;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water above the fire; then put a straw or puncture into one pot and place the other head on the mare's mouth,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the smell of smoke will rise within the mare's belly; then make her exhale as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second jumping happens abruptly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not worse, then orders the lady to move her left hand in oil or musk of a stick, and then let her go into nature.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and whoever finds it; and when she has found it, gently stretch and extend it little by little, so that the mare does not suffer from the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must move gently right and left, and then pull; if he comes and turns around.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mare's mouth is sore, as we have said, then the treatment of exhaling and fumigating with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all that we have said, then you must ensure that you do not hurt the mare in pulling.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is said that what is in the mare's mouth, place it on the woman's thigh, and then perform an enema of mixed medicines.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if she will take it and put it back, and returns to suffer; but all this, when it comes into her mouth or throat with bad smell from the abdomen and head, then bleed the malady.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then it must be said that there are no demonstrations from the ancient ones of smoking with cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which we smoke the woman is this one:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And is seen as if it were a catheter, and put the head underneath delicately in its place, and the hairs large in the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and if there are smokes in the ashes, and the smoke rises from it while she is still burning, and then make her start again.
de percier lou fondement	the fire.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	There comes a child who is born without properly formed foundations, instead having a subtle deformity:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Now it is required that the child perforates that subtlety in his body without causing any serious injury, and gathers the movement so as not to touch it:
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place him on a linen sheet anointed with oil and wine, then the treatment of fumigation until he is healthy again:
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will rejoin, then place a pin in the wound and let his hands rest for several days, and he shall be bound as soon as the child wants to go into rooms:
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no occasion for these hot treatments of wounds or incisions; it is required to cover that treatment: if you are treating, as we have said about the pin in the wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the foundation defect:
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that originate from the foundation are inflammatinas and larger than those originating near the foundation or in the interval of two parts:
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more, and when the inflammatina is old, then you should work on it, loosening slightly moistened or softened joints:
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and there are no persistent fistulas; they are known by the fact that when the patient expels them or vomits, and sometimes in jumping they go away:
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder and part of the genitalia; and they reach the juncture of the thigh or any other area:
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And in this case we know that the fistula is persistent and not just a part of the foundation:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And if you insert your index finger or foundational point into the fistula where there is no twisting: and place a thin needle of iron or steel in the fistula when it does not have twisting:
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, then you insert a small piece of lead or possibly horsehair as much as it touches your finger on the fistula:
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel anything, and it doesn't come out as a discharge or vomiting or bleeding, then as we have said before:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	realize that she does not perforate the pin again with your healing efforts:
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And if the fistula is just in the bladder or the channel of urine, when it leaps with urine and cannot be cured by medicine:
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	And if it is pierced at the juncture of the thigh, then there comes a tendon coming towards the limb:
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	and if there is no twisting and the onset of pain, then it becomes soft and it does not require medication or hot treatment:
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no remedy that requires effort, and the vainness of people who interfere with them:
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those which are not persistent and not old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced:
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the painful palpitation between his thighs above their hames, and inclined to its abdomen:
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then let usaile if it comes out of the fistules, et les encele pies d’aute in veinne.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels severe pain at the foundation, it indicates you must strike two indications.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	If one feels strongly that the attempt has pierced it; and whether you discover a hole through your needle or find thread in its place, but know that it is perforated.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If not worked upon more, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	For there is such a thing that can be well healed by many, but only in small amounts.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the aid it makes if it is to heat the cautery gently according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And it boils in the fistula as long as it moves away from its base; and do this once or twice, until you know that these flaws are removed, which seem like a feather quill.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then you treat wet wounds with moss as long as those flaws are weeping, and then you treat the scraping by heating and joining them together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is so well-healed, that's good. Otherwise, there is no other way to heal it.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it tries between, and does not pierce the needle or its foundation, and there is thick coverage of cloth or sinew between your thread and the tent, then you see the fistula which shows such covering.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the cauldron is at the beginning of the fistula, and then you pour it in front of the tent, and apply the cautery afterwards until it moves from the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And then the tent is delivered, and it was burned; then mend those faults that seem like a feather quill, and do not leave any traces of them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not last long, and cut between you and your practice, whether thecave or medicine fire.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery, there are two bone procedures involved: namely, arthroscopy of these displaced joints, and incision into the blood clot and removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then there is a treatment with warm linen or wet straw until the joints become bowed, and it inserts them back into their position.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then there is a treatment for inflamed wounds with persistent burning and dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess arises just above the foundation, and is distanced from its source, then you must pour hot oil or foundational fluid on it, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent (referring to an abscess or wound), and it is between two layers (which could imply surrounding tissues), then it should be pierced, unless there are only signs of infection and hope, by administering one of the three treatments:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Or you burn it as we have said, or you puncture it just above the foundation, or if you put tent and treat it as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not puncture too deeply into the foundations, so that you do not compromise the structure holding the foundation, and allow adjustments to happen according to desire.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then proceed with the treatment as we have discussed.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	In the event that it becomes healed, you may remove its covering and return it to its foundation, or if not, leave it covered near the base, or by tenting or some other pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then I command him who needs it most to enter into the wound as much as you wish.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in its deeper part; if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there are no times like this when forming a fistula: and it is as soon as you open the fistula, and it is located opposite to the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If you take a tent perceived in this manner:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I insert the same, that is, a twisted thread into it (the incision), and stretch the tent throughout the entire length of the fistula while it's open.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it extends to the margin of the deeper base therein, then extract the thread from that penetration, so you can open your foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And remove the chief thread, and join together those twisted threads, and bind them to each other, and leave it for a year or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And do not constrain it at all while the threads are in these positions between two, and they lie.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then care for the wound as long as it is sealed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If there is no fistula present, make a fistula in any manner you can; if it's not too deep or extensive.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not command us to let the closure cope if it is too deep or extensive; and then care for it as we have said, until it becomes sound again.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinous process which we make a fistula in if it is very deep and involves one or more vertebrae.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, because it does not command that which must not be done; as you see here.
des emorroydes	These embolisms
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	The embolisms are in two ways: or they are found within the foundation, as small blood and large.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	s. The Old English. ousually. Answer:
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And then again it may come by a small amount of yellow water or blood, and has golden color.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those who have within the foundation, if you command the patient to exhale into rooms until the foundations begin to leak, and their children appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hasten it with tongs, or hold it in your thumb, then prick the root thereof;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they cannot keep it in their moistures, then take it to one of these: a cloth, or a cotton swab, or from the corner of a napkin.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract it as you must, then coat it, and powder any of the hot pastes that might be in the vessel of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you may cauterize it as the cauldron or barrel of cautery prescribes, and then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundations cannot yield, then enema the patient with an enema that is harsh and abrasive to cleanse him from what is within his foundation so that it may come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	sansa iltew defface himore ailtres laiss:rature thefres:re legeu.i :entire,leslere. Here. iciens'safterit. Ipsum :naturisures.entrance cestir deparle offerry.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you prepare your ungual or pliers and hold them, then treat him as we have said, until he is sound again, and so avoid the cutting by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is required that you treat the wound in this manner: firstly take a twisted thread, and pass it through a needle, then stretch the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread on top of the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and hold the twisted thread formed, then pass the thread through the needle, and remove the needle, and perform the same for all other wounds, and leave one to correct any excessive bleeding.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a plaster on the foundation either with rose oil or wax, and apply it to the foundation, and instruct the patient that they should lie down.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let them remain until they start bleeding again, and when they begin to heal, carry out the other treatments, so long as they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	either soon or foundation (referring back to the earlier plaster application)
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it occurs suddenly in the intestines, and due to a natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medical help cannot be of any use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is required that you reseal the puncture with either a bandage or your ungual above it, which does not let it get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then care for him as long as it is needed if that's what it requires.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot be resealed, if the wound reopens more forcefully than before, care for him as much as possible so that he remains healthy, and scourge him.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then care for him as long as he remains healthy.
dou fremit	or tremor (which might refer to the shaking motion used during certain procedures)
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	and it is a superficial wound that doesn't heal quickly by itself, so take care of it;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	: The Frenchme devoir. The French leser. ás grevigure lesce (2les :
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a cord of one peacock feather, or a strong swan's quill, and place it over the trembling, until the purple circle completely envelops it.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around the entire cord until you cover completely the trembling, and place it on its roots, and loosen the trembling of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if it is a cord made from rain or iron in this manner, and subtle underneath and stretched above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not perceive it for the reason of holding onto it, and press it And if you see, if you cauterize the trembling, as it is before or with the fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	in the form of a poultice.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	There has never been made any poultice of silver or lead, or melted rainwater or blood, and neither small nor large ones according to the manner in which they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These, however, are used in the care of children who are weak and suffering, and they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the poultice being both small and great if it is above the size according to this manner, or when the belly is tied in this way.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a protrusion or the belly is tied like you see, and the cords are placed in two places on each side: one at point .ij., and the other at .i.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	or the belly is filled with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment paper, and it is completely enveloped by small protrusions.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each of the protrusions .i., there must be a distance, then it is inserted into these protrusions .i. with strong thread or twisted wire about .x. or up to its edges, and assemble the belly as for an ox.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inserted, if it adheres to the instrument in front with strong thread, then poultice; and this is the shape of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And if the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and it is anointed at the top of the poultice with oil or beeswax or something similar, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the monks grasp their .ij. hands together until they are all visible, then remove the poultice, and elevate the patient's legs to the head position.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if he sleeps all night like that, it is more of a help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize the patient in the disorder of the stomach, and the medicine comes out quickly, then it starts again until he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are foundational or abscesses, then also cauterize them subtly as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of the poultice placed underneath tightened leather:
des plaies	from wounds.
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	And we have said about the treatment of wounds; now you shall hear the care for hands and medicine according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are variously made; and as they are made of those which are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	For the injuries in question are made by piercing and cutting, and with sword or knife or club or arrow or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	According to the laws of wounds, if a cut is on the neck, or on the head, or the leg, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar body parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head injuries because their mention will be recorded in my chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs to the head or the bone is not fractured, if it is taken care of by piercing or similar actions, and the skin is all torn up and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you doubt slightly about the incision: if it causes much more pain on the cranial side initially, especially when there is little bleeding from the wound, and then healing either in that part or against it.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And reject excessive intake of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not heal better, then reduce his meat intake and refrain from drinking wine or chewing tobacco.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply to the wound if it brings forth bleeding, stop it with swabs dipped in rose oil or strong wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if it does not bring forth bleeding, then apply to the wound if it is still fresh flesh and has not been moved by air or powder, I will speak of this briefly afterwards.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	lle cauthears :es, in French anonymously lexamain itaunce oulden; In theu. Whaterre: "fier of whichses.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like sword-making and resembling, and the lips cannot come together naturally by pressure, they come together only by force; as I say in wounds of the abdomen from stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound penetrates bone and closes up, holding it only by a slight force if pressed; then heal the wound with medication and restore the hard skin of leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instructs the patient to eat large meats like cooked wheat and pork, as well as similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you mend or stitch purity, and it does not adhere to the bone, but presses the entire purity completely, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped with medications, then coil the artery like a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these small and simple wounds are treated lightly: and let you apply this powder that binds so as to soften the arteries.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is: take incense for a part; blood from a dragon in two parts, and live copper in three parts, and mix it subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And use the wound, and compress it firmly until it heals well and joins with all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then let the thread tighten well, if it does not swell; because we do not remove the medication until she is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And there has never been made such copper alone when we do not have the incense and blood of a dragon, but only because the artery has softened the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the artery has moved the wound, then it is only in this sense that no one applies this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But apply some digestible ointments or bread made of barley flour with water and honey until it becomes soft.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heals other treatments as long as she is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then use subtle pinches.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about this after arm fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the chest.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the injury comes to the chest or wound and is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the arm, but if it compresses the chest or stretches the artery.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is compressing, there is no other treatment except to leave the curing and not apply anything restrictive, because it hurts the chest and causes retracted breathing.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the bone marrow is cold, and its continuity which is with the brain, which are the strongest parts of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	illetre nen  16thsans. ieval, as itale. In Old French Theocularly caesime.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other stones of my kind according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind and bandage it until healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep, swollen, and full of blood, then pierce deeper or lower.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arrow is lodged, and blood clots form, then remove it, and cleanse it, and the proper skill for cauterying it.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the thorn in the throat is lodged, or it pierces, and its removal requires care, for then the meat will come out.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If the piercing in the throat's larynx, and not to touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then observe recovery, and let no day pass without treatment of ointments until healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has been impressed into the bone, then cut it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are bone fragments, then drive all of them out with force; and those that cannot be removed, let the wound heal.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	Or dislocation and displacement should be avoided.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I have mentioned before.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening, then treat it as I have described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the arrow-wound or cut.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's an arrow-wound or a cut, and the wound is deep, then observe if there are wind currents in the air causing further pain to his maladies; you will see that such a wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh all over the flesh, do not apply the powder immediately, nor tie it tightly to a part that does not recover quickly.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And retract it into the body, and apply cold compresses to his malady.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But apply attractive ointments and bind it tightly for a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	congeursseccansseurieu:niferrentifteuxilleuilecanaient outavirectheintiue parisipeilages
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And let the patient sleep on the wound for three years, or two years, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no more spasm or uncontrollable shaking of the body.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the bone positioning, if you know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat it then with bandages and other treatments, as long as he is healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal, and work is done, then you know that there has been an opening; in the way we should treat it.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or worse on its backside, then treat this before anything else.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, with plaster; if small, with powder; and if it's embedded in the bone or filled with fragments, treat the wound and remove any deep wounds.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not deep wounds, let the wound remain open, and lighten the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is made as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	double abdominal rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The abdominal ruptures are large and serious or small, depending on the severity of the injury.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound there has never been an injury to the intestines or internal organs due to this invasion.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the bandaging is more difficult, and never has a small wound been worse than the large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because for that they often push back the intestines by pushing them in and out repeatedly.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell immediately upon feeling pain, and therefore they are pushed back more frequently.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and it's worth considering that the main wound causes the intestines to move back into their original position more than other injuries.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you know that abdominal rupture is characterized by three main methods:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	(The) common bandages have been used in treating the abdominal rupture.
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the treatment of other wounds on the legs, and the common treatments are similar for other injuries;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and they are cleaner than other treatments for the wounds;
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	iven en payer. Here istoil e13rdose: "The Middle Acheve 5003rdice. It'soldes: And itoise (thee4. Thismeatdecrease of the cure ofse desuicire, The2 :rre-up tolater.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And when pieces are removed, it is done by one of these two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said.
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is inflamed by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is chilly, treat the part as follows:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten one sponge or such cloth with water only briefly.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you boil it in water sweetened with sugar and pepper.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine so long as it remains swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never make it too tightly bound, and is moved more by pressure than for loosening.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see it swelling receding, moderately moisten or boil and not harm the intestine.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this it is lightened the entrance of so few things.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then slightly pierce the wound with an instrument of cutting to remove the haemorrhage.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first remedy is movement rather than cutting.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	because we should not cut it in great need without reason.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is due to dislocation:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts deep into the cavity and does not heal quickly, then it takes on this shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine becomes spasmodic:
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is reset according to its natural place:
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have any means of doing so, because it is worthwhile:
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it's located on his stomach:
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if it seems that you should lie on your backward-facing side:
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	cte laireg. Whatentil. oulden:entrails 13rdraguccer. TheFrench, andre,sac.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	And if she is located on the abdominal area,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	and raises the head and the belly higher than the surrounding areas.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and if her abdominal route lies within one of its divisions.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and assumes that the lower part (referring to 'navree' as an archaic term for 'nave' or 'inner cavity') is higher than the other, which may be a misinterpretation of medieval medical descriptions. Typically, in the context of abdominal regions, it would make more sense if this were referring to one part being "lower" (more medial) relative to another ("other"), rather than "higher." A correct translation might read:
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and hereby necessitates providing it to such wounds that are large and serious (large/serious injuries).
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	And it also pertains to small injuries where the appearance (appearance - visible signs or symptoms) is considered.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	and in your hands, one minster (person) who has the entire route of that part at his grasp (referring to 'route' as control or influence over an area; here it implies someone with significant authority or knowledge about abdominal health).
et assemble les levres;	and assemble them together (possibly referring to joining different parts or sections).
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way (method) of sewing (referring to suture techniques).
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you should provide an awl or more (provisions - supplies)... according to the size of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	And then let blood come from the head of the wound. Give him some space, and pierce it with a sharp hook or a strong wire-like thing;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the skin with the same pointed instruments.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is inside the skin in that area until you penetrate it completely;
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and assemble the sharp hooks around the staple instrument;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then pull a doubled thread through one of the pointed instruments;
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and arrange the pointed instruments at the wound's edge;
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then give him some space, and pierce with another hook;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then let the two threads run through in a similar manner to how you made the first one;
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing so according to what you have learned about hooks.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the instruments be of various sizes, from delicate to large;
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because small hooks cover the entire area, while too thick ones cannot fit in well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason they must be varied in size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and must not push the hooks too far into the flesh and skin;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so they do not touch or interfere with the wound before sealing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then pull out the hooks from the wound so they do not harm the patient while sleeping;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and place cloth or bandages on the hooks to hold them in position;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let the wound be sealed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	And this method of bandaging has a higher tendency to come undone in small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	Or there he suffers from a nail injury.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	His second method of dressing is common.
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And it is when you gather nail shards and the fragments of the sinew, assembling them with an iron pin or something sturdy enough to hold them together;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have fully assembled these pieces together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reinforce the pin at the point where it was applied, in the manner that they apply dressings;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And leave space between each dressing of approximately a finger's width;
ceste costure sevent li home,	This dressing will keep it contained;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	And I sewed a wound which was caused by one of them hitting his stomach;
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was armed with a knife;
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was more than a hand's width;
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was indeed several hand's widths long;
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was between his abdomen;
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine then he had been for twenty-two hours;
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was stitched up a mere fifteen years ago;
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physician had judged that it should bleed and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	wentifreshianlume  <iele iflet miexe :sawantienture:elifecrieve to liflectifles locreximente soleuwaxoirrecongevelesseuranscope etreesentheuange.elles,uferranger 12angloreuises andagharectiherneiagges deinceuse that :usauratilai
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And bandage soaked with warm water a few times a day, and wash the wound with honeyed water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I shall now describe the proper methods of treatment:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and hold the thread on the farther side within it.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has felt pain in its right joint, if it had swollen so much that the hoof was off or you have used thread inside.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make an incision on the other side within that portion which is filled with blood.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and it is my understanding of this stitching that you do as well as the tanners make leather.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and let the swelling of one side go down, and then repeat on the other until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, which Galien taught properly.
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is done in such a way that anyone can assemble the two parts naturally.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the swellings to the other chiefly in turn:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	and take a needle or joint opposite that one, and make an incision there only.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two swellings;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and make an incision in the farther part within it.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave both swellings;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make an incision in both of them within that portion which has a joint opposite to it, in the other two hands thereof.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	: https://evelen: The Old French itinerary theuput Ijacmeatas legeanatomes ofrè desirdes.a la terre :er, ilterre:sainsirainscription. What, asleep.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	If Galien heard this word, and no one testifies to it.
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	We must sew the abdomen with nails, each having its own thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And it should be that one nail is thrust from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew metals.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And it is known that when the routing lies between the abdomen...
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is more painful than other nails on that side of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds...
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And when you revive the fresh wound to all its flesh, so that it move away...
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If it returns the intestine, and its cost; then put above the powder tightly sealed...
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if it has moved away, then put above any ointment that is present, so long as the wound bleeds...
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And hold the thread, and be welded together the sinew, and the marrow...
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as with other ones, so long as it is sound...
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no medicine, then put it on as soon as she begins to bleed, cottony material...
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move it. .ij. times a day until it is sound...
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other knowledge of medicines in any case, as the wounds are simple...
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt that it is not made up for members' primary structure...
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	lle morale le monde: Fromme: "anatomy enlairen'oure itire. ices anatomy morse. oupore and theologue.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And let them enter through the armpits, and under the joints.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if it feels pain or swelling in the joints, and this happens often.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If one administers a black bowel-washing solution, and immediately then the swelling appears in the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierces deep within, and he knows that the larger the intestine, the easier it is to heal than the smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The young intestines that are pressed cannot heal when they are compressed.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is through understanding the position of the vessels that are involved, and the subtlety of the entire body structure, and approaching its natural state in relation to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if he jumps off the wound, and sets it again like an intestine, while still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is large and turned yellow or black, then it's essential to reset the joint that turns black with blood not coming out again.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because it has veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then consider what's in between (the gap or space),
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and attaches the .ij. bandages from the part around the wound to eventually align the extraction when the swelling decreases, and the wound bleeds less.
de la routure dou boueil	from the routine of bloodletting.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	And if the intestine is round, and the wound small.
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored to some people,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	Because I saw some men wounded by a spear in their abdomen.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was the wound in the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and became infected and turned into a fistula, and in this it had discharge and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I administered treatment according to what I thought was best and continued to treat it subtly until he became healthy again, and his limbs were joined;
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw them joined together, I doubted whether his painful abdomen had a serious issue;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not suffer any further illness but continued to improve with better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And none of the experimentalists claimed that when he had an injury in his intestines, it must be treated part by part;
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	so they began with large tests, then joined together the lips of the wound;
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when those tests revealed that the wound had extended to the jaw, then they placed it under pressure with the two pieces;
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it pulls its mouth away from above;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then they cut into his head, and if it does not loosen further;
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then they performed another test in that manner as before until the wound was completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and measured the wound;
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	: the following translation. From medieval Latin translating it'sure airaitheyre commentaire ofer: Thewould develuccles (offeresment enlatrepresentedictiou. Ipsumorse:lore, le mondeu aliterature.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	gardes apeceurseurie.nãsse,se,sanglore (a:se ceinte. Siéce deigne. And the naynece iftec avocresent iaitse.sse.
en teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the chief of this intestinal thread that is very thin.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	And then bind it with this fine silk thread. (The instruction here refers to a specific procedure in medical practice where a suture material is selected and used for closing a wound or an incision.)
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	And then insert the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and reinforce it in its course; (This line describes a step in suturing where after knotting the suture material, one would proceed to stitch or re-stitch through tissue, such as an intestinal section.)
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of suturing is not dangerous if done according to the guidelines for skill and hope (This statement reassures that following proper techniques in surgery, which includes intestinal suturing as described, should lead to a successful outcome.)
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially in one of the loops of the intestine, there is neither cure nor healing to be hoped for due to its subtlety; (This line warns about the challenges in treating large or complicated wounds within an organ like the intestines where traditional medical interventions may not offer a solution.)
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or if it is (Here, the text suggests discussing cases involving either a fistula formation which might be associated with complex surgical management issues within the context of intestinal suturing.)
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Seal off any wound or abscess if it grows over time, as it will generally become everywhere "fistula". (This suggests that an untreated wound or infection can lead to the formation of fistulas, which are abnormal connections between two body parts that should not be connected.)
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and particularly if it is covered and tightened (The text here emphasizes conditions where a wound or abscess might become encapsulated and constricted, potentially complicating healing processes such as in the case of fistulas.)
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to its nature, difficult and painful, or one does not feel pain (This part describes the characteristics of a fistula which can be challenging to treat due to their location and associated symptoms like discomfort or lack thereof.)
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also as tightly encapsulated as the quills of a porcupine (This compares the severity of a fistula's constriction to something that could be imagined in nature, emphasizing how restrictive it can be.)
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never clearly open, nor thick; (This line notes the varying characteristics of fistulas over time. Some may become more obstructed while others might partially close or clear up depending on various factors such as treatment.)
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes it is enough, and other times not quite (The text implies that the success in treating a fistula varies. Sometimes treatments can be sufficient, while at other times they may fall short of expectations.)
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the divisions of wounds which are not healed, and there is no remedy for it; (Here, the author talks about cases wherein an open or non-healing wound. And since there's no cure.)
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	hereof fie tete defforestes les cheveille. Orlxvjuii.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It means, as for knowing by little blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	For its malaise;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	For this reason, because there is hardness within it, and under the lips where it does not let anything be born;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or it has too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or it has stone-like hardness, and its material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	For this reason because the corruption is like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Because of its property in that area it is slow to digest, and slows the healing, and leaks by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or it has veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments with medicine in the division;
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it suggests that you should know the treatment for a fistula made by hand work;
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It causes fistula in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves;
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the costs;
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or at the vertebrae of the back, or to any joint in the hands or fingers;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and the main principle of body part of the text messageorceles ce envesquerre in thexelainsextreverbe partitelmeche veritgreet.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	Andromesole. Alainle theater, the French. In medieval letresainsience tithal, itis, thexentire entailre:esquire. Iberage. Theocurrect: age,cumbers, sentence 10 apearnece ofere, incapablet eyte.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is no fistula that does not bleed near it at all, which I have already said, and you have confidence in the treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you know if it takes a tent of rain or iron, if the abscess is straight, then pull it out.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	And if the abscess is twisted, seek for a subtle tent of water.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the fluid moves within due to its twisted nature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the abscess has protruding parts that you cannot properly search for with tents.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if enemas are used on one of the protruding parts.
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because applying moisture or cautery to another part can mislead it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you should watch for its retraction with hope that you know whether it has bone or nerve and is healed.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask well of the patient about the pain that they feel when pressed with your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know the actual location of it truly, whether it's away from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in none of the locations that I have mentioned, if the abscess follows this course as I described to you.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and bone for another one and the corrupted elements within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then continue with the treatment as long as it remains sound.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the abscess is thoroughly located at the right spot, then it's necessary to cut into it as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I apply wet medicinal cloths around the abscess and squeeze them into its head.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medication dissolves the unnecessary excess accumulated at the base of it.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply heated herbal remedies to healthy areas surrounding it, so long as they are sound.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	but if it is not sound by this means, then I shall cauterize as we have described earlier.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is rotten within the abscess, then I cauterize it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If one's mains lice que duerent les bonevoitre :13.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if his bone is exposed, and it has corruption and blackness, so long as the corruption covers the entire bone, he.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the treatment of these strange things continues until he is healthy again.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if not yet healthy, and returns with a bow as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You know that you are not yet far enough done:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If it's discovered and you wish until you are at the bottom:
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And if the entire bone has corruption, then restores the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if he is so now healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not so, you know that the corruption is too much to overcome;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other solution but to remove the limb by its natural means;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if he has a small bone corrupted and you can extract it with tongs;
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If the arrow is retrieved with that available instrument;
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if he has maintained bone, then remove all surrounding tissues but leave no remnant behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	And if the movement makes it contrary to its natural place, and there is no error or fear;
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it copes with motion and moisture, and liberates the bones;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot place them overnight, should they fall into the wound causing further pressure or obstruction;
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	And leave them there protruding into the bones;
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And then they will be lighter on the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it's great les french for mein to leu.
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	Toutesfois enjoul the same thing aske sence desmeat French: Encontre l’il aout-1000sure lesemeasure. Invernaux tolk :en ligne ices arnature. Whatsoever leuille (prezenture,
puis restoure la plaie;	Then dress the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of rheumatism, and comes down just as with the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it must be covered and treated as quickly as possible, and then cared for until it is set;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in one man's leg;
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I urge you to provide an example and help in your work;
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man in his thirties who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body;
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As the materials came to the leg and were taken out of a large incision without finding a specific reason for it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	But they looked so foolishly over it that they opened up the incision;
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	And they inflicted much material upon it, and became a fistula, and there came out many parts that were loose and moist from the inside of the leg;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	And there was more about it that they put on the man in his twenties years; and he had no success whatsoever in this art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	And while this is notewr from the foot.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and this causes by piercing deep wounds;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the young man's body became red, and had a yellowish tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched a tent in one of those perforations, and then sought out all the perforations.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurriedly set about, and delved into one of those perforations until I discovered a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it putrefied and crumbling, and the decay was just within the bone itself.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw that there was a similar condition in the decayed bone and took care to consider it did not have another type of decomposition, as that is what I had seen.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began the process of healing the wound using similar medicines over long periods, but it could not be sutured;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I returned, and found the bone as before;
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the decay continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then took it away from me, and I began to suture it again.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but yet I cannot take it as far as to place one palm of bone on it, and struck forcefully throughout its entire length.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then he returned the medicines; and he was cured and sewn up quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it is not necessary anymore to repeat the work except for the slight weakness of the patient who cannot endure.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for fear that I might die from it.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For because of blood evacuation often occurred, but he was cured completely,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and arose from the bone as a hard cyst, and was of good constitution and did not cause any harm or contrary effects in all circumstances, neither to the arteries nor coming forth.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the shoulder blade is dislocated anywhere along its course, it must be set in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take .I. ligament, and pull on the head of the dislocated bone which opens upwards (apert),
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and forbid any movement that would extend it upwards (up);
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and apply a stronger ligament from the same layer as the first one ('lainne'), and tie it to the cyst that has formed beneath the bone (sus la char).
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and they become loose (estent le chief), if you draw out the corrupted cyst underneath ('corrumpue'),
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and find out whether there is a cyst underneath the ligament ('leu'), which if it breaks would not harm the dislocation (que li soie ne blece la char);
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and tie a fire or cloth underneath the bone ('desoz') to cover the corrupted cyst,
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and is necessary as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and a stronger ligament again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted (corrumped, and not in any part of it is located therein.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If you find out deffort a maniere en leurre d'apres. Cauter la cestil maltes.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	And then they join one part to another the decay, and it becomes the longer of the two sides. A little bit like what we have said before.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the decay is in the joint, and when the joint becomes rotten, it contains bone from the other part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the decay is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no difference but for both covers.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the decay is in the thumb or in a tooth, that's very much of that thing.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	But everything indicates that you must examine that corrosion and see how it affects you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And the patient is treated in all ways possible, but do not let the vein or nerve cause harm to you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And you know that the incision and sutures for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason it must be equipped with each corresponding aspect of its tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And you will see the instrument that you will need, according to your knowledge of this craft.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and testimonies about diseases' methods;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if the instrument you need according to what it requires.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder dislocates either due to moisture or by dryness.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have the medicine for that corrosion through the treatment with medicines, they do not benefit at all.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	and it must cover that limb from the vein's entry until the corruption comes out.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if it causes such great harm to the patient, either by death or by malice, which is greater, due to the defect of a limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and there are signs that the member becomes blackened, as if it were charred by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the darkness, then proceeds with those corrosions in the limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold of all its parts; if you hasten with covering,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is due to the piercing of any venomous animals, such as a sea scorpion and wasp and similar cases,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head of the limb, and he covers it, not giving it any space to come near just with his hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, and he covers the joint, so that the corrosion does not move just to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, he covers it; and if it passes beyond that covering, it is his death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no comparison between the quantity of strength,
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so long as the corrosion comes or bites: if it comes at the first joint, he covers the other joint afterward.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes or bites, he covers the whole limb.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises into the leg, he covers the joint of both knees.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient with the malady die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover or bandage a member is when it lies above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one servant along the inward side, and another servant along the outward side.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you draw the chord that lies between the two sides at one point in the limb, until the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then you cover it with bandages and place two layers of linen on either side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy part;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and it stretrances the malady;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	sseurge:saint. 2sternage.cumper. Iface, and it'faire:sacre. Evengard :allurexime:nagsibletire tolestublement,s :socresculle aithe seingrepresse.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	You place it on any restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the painful limb afflicted with a contagious ligament, and treat it so that it becomes healthy again.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you about what happened in one of his homes:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	It happened in his house like a dark cloud of fire.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And corrosion came first to his house's duty, so it affected the whole homestead.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when he saw the corrosion, he tried to cover up the homestead, and it became healthy again.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And long after him came back the corrosion or took it from his hand, and he came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I placed upon him things remedial after the purification of his heart, but could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he said to me that I should hold his hand, but I only hoped it would have a corresponding effect.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	And I also doubted whether if I held his hand, he might not die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	Because his body was weak; and he despairingly returned to his land. (Note: This line explains the patient's condition prior to treatment.)
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And when I covered his hand, he was made well again. (Note: This line suggests that some form of intervention to protect the patient's hand led to improvement in health, aligning with medieval medical practices.)
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have no such stories to tell but by way of what we know. (Note: This line concludes the translated passage by indicating that the speaker shares knowledge based on personal experience or known medical practices.)
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There is no such thing as drawing blood in the flesh at once, and it takes so long that it causes a great assembly of men. (Note: This line seems to describe a process or consequence related to medical procedures without directly translating any specific Old French text.)
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And they run and pierce, and leap over the bowman, as we common men do. (Note: This line may not directly translate from Old French to English but seems metaphorical in a broader context of describing action within a medieval narrative framework.)
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the skin which is above is also very delicate like some fine cloths. (Note: This line metaphorically describes the nature of human skin using a comparison to textiles, fitting within the context and narrative style.)
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And the bone will not be hurt and neither the nerve; such an illness is called "unhealthy". (Note: The translation interprets the original line as describing how certain conditions affect specific parts of the body, in this case, likening diseased states to a state of being unhealthy.)
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not disturbed by "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so elongated that it extends to the bone just below the surface, then it is disturbed by "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and if he cooks that flesh entirely, and immediately when it is thin like a cloth, as we also do.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and is not affected by its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you believe that the flesh is affected and decay is not visible on its surface...
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the flesh is thickened by this cleansing procedure...
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	observe whether his breasts are large and the belly beneath them has a foul odor...
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	and therefore the Egyptian medicinal cleansing method which it is performed...
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take ashes, and oil, and litharge, equally so, and cook in one vessel over fire...
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	so that the medication is red in color and becomes as thick as honey...
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take from that according to your need, both water and honey...
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and in cleansing his breast, and hold back the abscess...
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain for six hours, then extract it by purging;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this much, until his chest is softened, and his bones loose.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never are water-ash enemas used.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	as long as this medicine is not present, and you should pour ash from oak wood into the abdomen above.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then it flows, and in enemas so long as you know that the chest is well formed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, nor Egyptian medicine nor water-ash enemas help him/her;
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if there is a slight lithotripsy effect with water and honey enemas;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you pour honey and wine milk over the patient's chest which has properties to soften and clean;
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and wine helps to dry (heal) the wound.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and after you have done it, if you believe that the chest is well-formed;
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if that type of cauterization causes blood to come out;
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you should apply a poultice of rosemary and wine oil on it.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you adminster of itenclle.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if his pressed breast is small, and the poultice cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If one slightly enlarges a wound with iron, and places on it an Egyptian ointment tent.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or basilic oil, as long as it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, if it leaves so long that the cloth or poultice can enter;
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the pressed vein is above, if the cup or instrument is lower than it;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the vein is in full view, if it does not allow for stretching;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the chest as you see fit;
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	When it appears such that the vein runs to its lowest point;
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the vein is in full view, if it does not allow for stretching;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the chest as you see fit;
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	When it appears by parts: that the vein runs slightly upward and does not change its course;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	And prescribe consolidating medicine for application on the chest;
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And are under such a cover of linen that it encloses the whole breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then cup that pressed breast; it becomes a little wider than before;
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Because they are smothered with such an ointment under another covering according to the quantity of the pressed vein;
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And put it on the pressed breast in order to straighten out the vein, and not remove the heavy covering until after one day once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And those who are on the pressed breast often do to remove the vein;
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And it is known what runs from the vein, if it's blood or a little bit or something digested, or indigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And take warning if he feels pain so much and it hurts; and whether it has an abscess or not;
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	And if it is noti : The treatment of cestuet d'eaux teneant ailier, and seize, ceau. Audeurment toxin develu dans en français :mesure sce en. Testes dukes coment :sures.
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that the chest heals already, and approach the healthcare;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then the dislocation occurs in the morning or every other day, and when you dislocate (the wound),
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If changing it to another dressing, and renewing the oiling.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his bowels become distended every day after that, you know (the patient's) chest does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle cautery after long touches does not make you lose hope in health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	Because the health approaches. For there are patients who delay seeking care for their wounds, and those whose conditions require opposite treatment actions;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if his bowels become distended both sides of the chest after many days, you know (the patient's) chest does not heal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if (the patient's) chest does not heal quickly and becomes alienated, apply together wet and dry substances to the site;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As if exudation occurs daily because he has taken a large part of vitriol (sulfur), for it is the remedy.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take daily discharge and apply with rose oil, and the mixture of strong wine in its substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then it is preserved and used; and this makes the mixture even more thickened like honey.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When there are no more daily discharges.
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Or take myrrh and frankincense, and grind them, and mix the powder with honey when it has been heated.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	And then apply it to the dressing, and attach it to the chest, and never for long did any astrologer examine him.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And root of a celestial tree that grows at least hundred years old;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And for simple or composite preparations: grind them, and make powder from it, and put on the honey I mentioned before, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the treatment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment.
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And you know that corruption has permeated the bone or hardened muscles or joints;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment of the ulcer, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the incision on the joint
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	The parasite is an incision that grows from under the palm's little finger.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	either the palm of the little finger, or by chance grows elsewhere as well.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is inflamed, and one does not pay attention to it if it turns into an abscess.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And they will grow and spread as far as the root of the joint grows, and perhaps even throughout it.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the corrosion right into the bone where it appears, causing a foul-smelling pain, and also affects the shoulders broadly, and they are tinged with green.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have described in the division, the treatment does not yield results.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It indicates that you must address all the excess iron which is delaying healing of the joint.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then you must cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery provides great assistance when the bone and joint are healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	But if the joint presses the character into it and begins to pierce, and the blood,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It indicates that you must place a restraint on the joint so as not to force it further into characterization.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	And raise it up high, and cut down softly and lightly on the character.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place medicine in all layers and corrosive substances within, you know that they cause great pain of ailment.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then he treats him with ointments as long as he is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, and it breaks, for as long as the bone rots, it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see the bone rotting, heal it immediately within a few days like it was before mentioned.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then he treats him as long as he is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if he is unruly, and restless, and feels great pain, it must be that you first heal him.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the bandage tightly in a way that it cuts across above when trimming;
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And ensure that the cut does not extend up to the area above the bandage, for he already suffers too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on that sooths.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the hidden hand (or 'soudeit' could be interpreted as 'pain')
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	You must address those who have pain in their hands from some accident or are entirely fleshless;
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes it has bones or even just a single one;
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them are born at the root of the joint or in any case we have to deal with;
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who have it in any two joints do not stop moving;
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those who have it at the joint of two places may stop moving;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of those who are fleshly is light, to some extent like so;
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Size it by a wide bandage at its root;
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	There who is born from the root of the joint hurts greatly to heal: hold it tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In that one which is born in or must be removed from the abdomen, it requires that you first cut around the swollen area to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with an appropriate thread for this purpose, and heal it while it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The wounds that come together arise either by birth or from the joining of a cut wound, or from burns, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is required that you cut the joined wound, then they must be repaited according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tent-like coverings or blankets soaked in rose oil so that they do not fuse together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two very thin pieces of cloth so long as they remain joined, which is required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When wounds come from either side without the palm, cut that joined wound so as required.
Des vils	Of little importance
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are clothes filled with superfluous luxury and melancholicness that come from several members of the court.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often occur in the legs of those who go on pilgrimages and work and bear burdens, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is required that you never remove the swelling from a joint, and then heal it properly in the church (or perhaps 'sanctum', referring to a sacred place of healing or treatment).
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The healing by fire follows a certain method: one way is to cut them and draw out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And another way is to bind the vein, and draw out all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is done in this manner: you raise the leg of water very warmly, so that the large part without removing it subtly.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then stretch the leg of the patient above the knee, just below the thigh to this part over the groin.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut into a vein in one place, or two places, or three, with a wide incision.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut and draw out the black blood from your hand, from one end to another, until as much of it comes out as can withstand the remedy's potency.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then apply lime juice, commanding him to eat black bread soaked with it.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and drainage as soon as the wounds are cleaned, and do it for the patient's benefit.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The way of handling the affected limb is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if it has much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then place it in a bath or apply heat, raising the leg with warm water until it turns red and swells the wounds.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it over the fire, cutting into the vein long at this part in front of the knee, or in the area near the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then move the skin over the inflammation, and scrape the vein at each section until she feels it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and she appears red and black, and as soon as it feels slack like a frayed rope.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then bind it around here, so that the skin is loose, and then pull back on the inflamed vein.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cut into a vein in another place beside it, and scrape the skin on the vein as long as she feels it.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then he removes the arrow from its place, just as you have done, and replaces it with another one, if you have previously done so.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then he takes a different size, or more than you know, and removes the arrow from its place, and places it back in the same hole.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then he draws out and removes another size of arrows; then he pulls the arrow from one size to the next, so that it shoots completely, then he replaces it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot remove and draw it out, then he shoots an arrow into its place with a strong double thread.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And remove it and draw it out, and shoot another arrow into its place, turning your hand from one side to the other until it shoots completely.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it does not replace, because if it replaces, then you cannot remove or draw it out, and it will harm the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it completely, if you place clean linen on the wound with oil and wine mixture, and heal it until it is healthy again.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is constricted and twisted together, and it is no longer straight as we have said before.
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	It indicates the need to divide it awkwardly but not replace it; and remove it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The iron form of which we remove the arrow is if it's a bowstring (corbe), and do not cut it so that you do not damage the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of great curvature because if it were subtle, you would cut the vein, but rather if it's as we have said before, and this is its shape.
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is anointed in legs, in warm parts where there are no plants or trees to absorb moisture from the ground.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it grows in another place than the legs, and this happens from the decay of the hide around it.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body of snakes and towards, in between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein show that it comes in the leg a great inflammation.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then heave him the vein, and begins to grow out of its roots from a tree.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	s lege desu.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	And let the swelling remain on the leg, and every time it oozes from the wound, if the wrapping presses into the swelling, and the new one.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining again, and do not cover its root until it is completely drained.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it off, it may recede into the joint, and cause abscess formation or ulceration, and a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because by cutting it so little and gradually, she must be treated until there is nothing left or a scar.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and there is never this vein when it is treated with two palms long or x fingers.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some have come to me where it issues from x palms of length, and when you cut it, a certain amount or wound will be produced thereafter;
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so it should flow; and the material within be drained away, and prepare various poultices for ulceration without delay, then treat it as one would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never at this vein does it rain blood; and immediately when it opens in the joint, or in the junction,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes out with many wounds, and which also oozes blood; treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of arrows that are embedded between leather and stone
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called "bull's sickness" because it occurs frequently with blood oozing.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small arrow that lodges between the hide and stone, and travels throughout the entire body.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and he feels quite well to each limb, as long as it does not reach the hide where it travels, or jumps up.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is full of various poultices for ulcerations, similar to intestinal worms or lice infestation in the abdomen.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubts his malignity, for when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, and comes out at the eyes.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him cured and drained, how much he can endure before the wound begins again.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	If it is required that you reset the dislocation above and below with a strong ligament tightly bound.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then pushed downward and into the track, and if it is turned in there at the channel, do not force it back out.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If the patient undergoes fire cautery as long as they continue to bleed.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm it does, if it causes them to become ill, as we have said before;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or headed straight toward the oil, restrain it above there with a strong ligament, then push downward into the track.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is required to use a medicine of purification for corrupt humors in cases where they are present,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if it is accompanied by indecent swelling (from the Latin "vianda" meaning food).
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	And from the pain coming from windiness,
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "Vakir" in our land and it is pain that comes to no member at all.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and moves from member to member; and this is what I have seen.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a woman malade and saw her arms, and there was a small swelling in the groove of both shoulders.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and as I continued to observe her, the swelling rose up just like a worm at the shoulder.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more quickly than anything else, just like fresh silver when it's cut from the vein;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	and the pain moved from there to the shoulder;
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then continued to run all around, as it came back to that other shoulder;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	In the 12th century aillement desir in Old French medicine tolkneüle cetera: Ipsum: " <<- Leuccess ithief.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was quite surprised when she moved so much from one limb to another, for I have never seen this illness manifest in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Always, everyone had the desire to move their painful joints elsewhere.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I did not see it that way, as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it was because she had a dry throat and the veins were exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason appears constricted wind.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear for these who are delightful, with moist throats and veins filled again.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you saw treating this illness, and the sick patient feels that pain we have mentioned.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the blood rises and falls above and below, and then coughs until that constricted wind flushes out.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it in your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if it cures this illness which drives away constricted winds, like foul potions and Serpent' mantles, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and where they pierce two hearts or two arteries.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity thereof consists in that they have great points, small ones, hairs, and soldered:
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two angles, and of those which have lengths, and of those wherein it has pieces:
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	:stout, and estuet. A-seies.
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	If like brain, heart, liver, gallbladder, kidney, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	If she no longer has any movement in these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you after, is:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	It implies that you must be careful with this arrow removal because the wound comes from various circumstances later on;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not present, then look for it, and treat the wound;
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the brain when the arrowhead strikes and penetrates bone, and it jumps up where it is on the skull;
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And when there is a 'blindness,' 'fracture,' 'rupturing' and 'piercing' of the nerves, and inflammation and piercing in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting from the colon;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps without breath through the nostrils, or ears; and possibly affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And jumps of the moisture-filled wound looking like lice, and in jumps as well as if it were burnt coal;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears to you, whether it needs treatment or not, and remove the arrowhead if it is there;
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the swelling when it stops or hurts is that it's close to the mother's left side, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not drained out;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the swelling also stops as if it were like lice, and in blackened blood, and comes colder than coldness, with sweat cooler than cold, and syncope;
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	See that it does not die;
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	:sejargesculage. If:nauge :ment,screa : itesse, ander.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces deep into the covering of this bone, it is near the small joints; and there is great pain and suspicion; and all the limbs move together.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach or perhaps jumps from the wound without affecting any part of the digestible meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes the abdomen or perhaps jumps through a patch of grass in the intestines, there is no hope for healing or removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and its contents leak out and flow away, and it causes great pain; you know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it has the same symptoms as the head and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder girdle and back spine and hand and foot, and the seemingly healthy limb according to several conditions are safe.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisoned, as I will tell you because of that fact, since you make such similar statements.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one house where an arrow struck or misaligned the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and took out the piece from the ear's fat elsewhere, and healed without any noticeable effect.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I took out an arrow that struck the fat in the oil near the paper underneayer:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was put back in place, and it only pointed towards the front of his body:
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was large of an Indian bow, as much iron weight in the ears; healed thereupe without any new misfortune occurring.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I removed an arrow from his throat area, and it was Arabic arrow in the ears of the beauche in the cease.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I trimmed the hairs, and removed them gently until they came out, and it became clean again for the patients.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I dislocated an arrow that was embedded in his body, which made me think he had died.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And then, having passed thirty years without changing his position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut under the arrow, and dislodged it, and it was pulled out without causing any further injury.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you find an arrowhead embedded in a patient where it is pointing downwards or backwards, and the wound was sutured over it.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	And it delayed the repositioning of the arrow within him, and did not correct its natural position in his body.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And it caused no harm in any of his natural works or functions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man with an arrowhead lodged in his flesh, and the wound was sutured over it.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And thus suffered great pain in that manner; and many other signs.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And I dislocated an arrowhead in the king's body, which was embedded within him;
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	And there was a slight inclination towards the right side; and the arrow had been fully reset.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I called for treatment after it was healed, twenty years ago. If I found the wound to be very narrow. (Note: The provided text is not coherent and seems to contain several Old French words or phrases that don't form a complete sentence as per historical records.)
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought it out with great subtlety, but did not feel it at all. (Note: As before, the provided text does not appear to be coherent in context or structure according to historical records.)
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a pain and pressure on his right ear. (Note: Again, this fragment seems out of context based on available Old French medical texts from the 12th-13th century; it may be an attempt to reconstruct or interpret some historical text.)
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was due to the point of the arrow. (This fragment appears to make sense within a medical context, suggesting that the narrator is referring to a wound caused by an arrow based on symptoms described earlier.)
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed it under heavy pressure in contact with the abdomen, because his limbs did not swell. (This line is a coherent instruction or observation that might be found in an old medical text discussing treatment methods for specific symptoms.)
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the patient's ear from the arrowhead. (As before, this fragment may not perfectly align with known Old French texts but is a plausible reconstruction of historical medical observation language.)
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed the pressure there two years ago, and healed the wound effectively right away, but it remained long in pain. (This appears to be a reconstructed statement summarizing treatments over time based on symptoms described.)
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	so long as he felt the arrow, one year within his flesh; and he told me. (This line could be a summary of an ongoing case report from an old medical text.)
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied to the wound medicated alum several years ago when it was open. (Again, a reconstructed statement that fits within an Old French medical text narrative.)
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow coming back to its place. (This line could describe a treatment method where an object is manipulated within a patient.)
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied it to the open wound along with that medicated alum, until the arrowhead became clearly visible again. (This line might be describing a step in a healing process where visibility of an object within a patient's body is observed.)
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and well performed his convalescence lasting for twenty months. (A conclusion to a case study or treatment report in the style of Old French medical texts.)
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I tried to pull out the wound with pins on both sides of it, but he could not be pulled out. (This line might detail a failed attempt at treatment where tools are used in an effort to address an issue.)
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	although I continued to subtly adjust and manipulate the methods of treatment for a year since I made well-crafted pins. (This could be part of an ongoing narrative in medical documentation describing sustained efforts over time.)
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its shape came about at the end of this chapter, and I treated it again, leaving the wound. (This line seems to reference a method or outcome described within an Old French medical treatise.)
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge judges that the notebook cannot restore his nose. (This might be commentary on outcomes of different remedies and their limitations, possibly included in a medical report or case study.)
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it again, and the wound was sewn up, and healed completely from all illnesses. (This is a concluding statement to an Old French medical text summarizing successful treatment.)
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	or you have told the quality of the extraction of some arrows, (This could be referencing specific procedures described within a treatise on arrow removal and wound care in Old French medical texts.)
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you put your treatment therein that I have not mentioned, because the books cannot possibly cover it all. (This could be a statement acknowledging the limits of medical knowledge in Old French texts and suggesting that some treatments are beyond documented procedures.)
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the masters know very well a little bit about it, and which is present and absent. (This fragment seems to be an incomplete sentence that could reference knowledge of treatments or remedies known by medieval healers.)
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	and nine works in English translation is not done thereof that semblant in a boitez;et que les bone de leu les arme esseur de l’art: (This looks of the chevein:sorceur: ite 10, et quator.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are driven because of certain ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	They come from the limb or through another way:
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps into the body or enters through it is an arrow entering its flesh, and this has never happened now:
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it remain as long as its flesh is tender and avoid letting the blood flow:
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it is driven into the bone and cannot emerge, let her remain for some years, and each day she must move:
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she jumps, and if not, let her penetrate slightly into all parts of it [the body], until the flesh in the entry area is expanded, and then extract her:
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is driven into the bone at its head [top], and it goes to one of the skull's cavities:
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And there are the accidents I mentioned to the patient: do not extract her, but leave her in place for some days after she becomes uneven [misaligned] again:
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if an arrow comes so close [near], it is the patient's death:
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is driven only into the bone and does not reach so close [to vital organs], then:
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and let it be for some time without any more serious accidents until we consider extracting her:
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she is very deeply embedded and cannot emerge, let her be treated inside, as I have told you; then heal the flesh until it becomes healthy:
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is driven back into the flesh [or body], and it cannot be seen, then let him seek help for her.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	Treatement de ces jours. Etre a louescalme lesemeans, ence taims auge. Forterms.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	:theorcéparle morce: The-meat a cheval, etendé : theor:age asur. Theil. Itumb.
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And it has no bone nor muscle nor vein, until the wound is large enough.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and if you throw the arrow into it, and if in the arrowhead there are ears that hold onto her tightly.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the bone that has been pierced by a part of an arrow, you can do so.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or crumble the ears of the arrowhead, as long as you can throw it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and delicately so that you do not break the arrowhead, but throw it more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then let the arrow go into its place until the wound is pierced; because removal of the arrowhead is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if in removing blood from you it goes against reason, then adhere to what we have said about the treatment of this subject in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and warn you against cutting a nerve and from the vein, and as to how you can throw the arrowhead safely,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or quickly or slowly, or firmly or lightly; and set the patient according to the shape in which the arrow fell.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because it's the greater help that he is, and if you cannot, then set according to what your signs show him.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that came from another place has opened nothing of it (the body), or the skin is swollen in some spot which one can see or feel immediately.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	so now, until the pincers can grip, and then pull out: if it springs back (now).
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it's lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly (circumventedly), so long as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be drawn out, then let her remain (stay in place), and try to extract again as long as she draws forth.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if he was hit by an arrow, then throw him out (all over).
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if he was bruised, and you see to administer a bandage, so that I give him an instrument of the skin (cheveis) so as not to be moved.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	nage ail. Whatwite lexte nenage lesa'saintique verse. Ipsum. Est-lysex:3rdise carte:esculent. Here. Thek and ito theadvert 201ere. And commenters entente:
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the arrow is stuck, then it takes one instrument with a pointed end to pierce in order to extract it.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, it must be that you collect all of the hair or the poison is present, if possible.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it covers.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is lodged or blood or in the abdomen or bladder or on the flank, and it's close by, and you can cover it up, do so if it takes.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and you must not cover the vein or nerve, and then suture it, and then treat the wound as is necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat the wound as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The formations of pincers with which the arrows are compared to the beak of a bird, and such is their shape.
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many of these methods: large, small, and medium-sized, depending on the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the pincer head is also like a bird's feather.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	by thrusting at the point of the arrow, which is similar to this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the pincers used for thrusting and knowing if this is so:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common wounds
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of wounds which healed, there were 21, and of those, six had chiefs (or leaders/managers).
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	which are after the ears, called "hairy herbs" due to their location and texture—this is known as... (the number would presumably follow here if it were not omitted).
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and there areij. vessels which appear at .ij.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	(Olden asume:surement theedecase of itj.iue laiaryaise,e :ce.ai.iage fromage decaisse.
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	sures :ithic laxque caesar. ous de cesare les feu.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two girdles which are on its neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins above the lips, and these are called "vigour" veins;
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly seen in each arm;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is located on the right side of the head, and it's called the "chef" vein by some people.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the motion is called "fast," and it consists of both the chief vein and the brachial vein;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	they call it "vein of the heart" by some people; and the brachial vein is on the right side of the chest.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	they call it "vein of the belly" by some people; and it is below the diaphragm.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	it is that which one sees openly in the belly-bag;
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the safety vein is the one that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two such veins;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and also on the leg and foot there are two such veins; one is situated under the belly-bag of the right side thigh;
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second one which is at the heel of the right side thigh (costeus) is called "the needle vein"; that same vein exists in the other foot's calf.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are two such veins;
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The injuries of arrows that are located behind the ears aid old abscesses, and to migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the quality of such a healer, as I have told you, is that they should resettle the head of the malady first.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rubs its skin or wounds are made of rough cloth; then tightens the patient's neck with a pin.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	As long as the arrows appear behind the ears in various levels of depth:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Please do as my saying to you, and how do you perceive the pain on your body, if it comes from within?
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the needle, and thrust it through the vein just to the bone, then lightly stroke your hand all over the wound.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And handle the skin and wound well in that depth, and draw out as much blood as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and tie, until it is sound again.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in my first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The injury of these veins that are in those areas (temples), if it is ancient migraine.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And again, and ocular cataracts are common, and the tears of blood flow in its course;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of such a healer, as I have told you:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And tightens the patient's neck as long as the arrows appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And sends out your shoulder blade from its place, and then signs of improvement.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lifts the kneecap on top of the joint index, and inserts the needle inside it.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	And lifts the vein upwards, like you have done in other cases, and treats the blood according to your necessity.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then dislocates the patient's shoulder, places the shoulder on the vein for an hour, then puts it on a cloth.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then forms it, and leaves it until it is healed; we have spoken about their care and extraction, as in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein on the forehead is as much as the healing of the cephalic vein and ancient facial diseases, and in epilepsy, and rheumatism.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is that the malady extricates its column by twisting it, as long as the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fosssor", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And places the point on the vein, and holds it in your hand or something else, allowing the blood to flow according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then dislocates the patient's column and fixes the vein until it is fully healed and not obstructed by a wide blood clot.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it does not necessarily mean that the clots are too large; and unhealthy veins, because the bone is close, and perhaps break the clot when they are thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the veins that are in the groin helps with blood flow and swelling, and in tendons, arthritis, and injuries to the earlobe, and diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of its healing is that it twists out its column by no means, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then it is healthy again, and the healing process takes some time with a little thin clot once or twice wide, because there is no bone in it.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the clot is thin, perhaps it breaks; then treat the blood according to your expertise, and then fixate the shoulder well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	And the veins in the forehead, and of ake lien.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	If like migraines and headaches come to her face, and gently when she is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of health if it is that his pain tightens his neck, then strains his nerves with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the feather thin long, and fix it in the space between the two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	Because the vein does not open well at first and begins now to correct it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not cure too much at once, correct the blood according to your need, then bind it tightly overnight because it is restored very quickly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And it is the shape of the feather:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The quality of health helps in the healing of the joints and muscles, and at the beginning of disease progression, and for many illnesses, and in inflammation, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and all similar cases.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of health if it is that his pain tightens both his necks; as we have said before.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And if the masters are standing above the malady's head, and the maladies look upon it from a certain angle.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then he opens the vein a little bit widely, then treats the blood immediately, as much as his art allows it.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then he makes another incision in another vein, then relaxes it slightly, and constrains the blood vessels moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that great pain does not return; and let it until the wound is healed in the morning.
De la sainie des leivres	Translation of this single line:
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of the veins above with aid in the mouth, and from gum disease, and cracks on the lips, and blisters and ulcers inside.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of sanctification is for making the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the mouth, and look at those veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known by that which makes them black, and that which has thin dark veins within.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	So take both and if you do not recognize them, and if you have doubt about them.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you also take the larger one of each part, and do likewise for those veins that are above and below, because this is a similar method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From sanctifying below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The sanctification of the veins below the tongue helps after the scalp massage (cephalic), and it is related to irritation in the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of this sanctification is that you make the patient look between your hands in front of the sunlight, and massage the tongue, and look below for a black vein on each side.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So make both healthy and do not press too hard on them because below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins which are commonly sanctified are done so according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or you press on it with a large flame brush, as for tubercles, and call it "anasil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and fine according to the width and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of this flame brush is very well-known, and it's wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the hairy veins that are clearly visible with large and disordered blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the shape of the olive fruit:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and it is better for dressing small wounds or to extract yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The health of the bishop, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the surgeon that he makes a clean cut and warms up the artery which lies nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it cuts the artery and bleeds out blood, then he must immediately stop it as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it should not be stabbed with the pointy part, but rather cut like in silk.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the bile does not open visibly, it is necessary to drain it and change a different one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or you want no drop of it, or you heal the vein in the arm where it is visible; it appears.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And cut it like silk with the pointy part, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the opening of the bile duct, it is necessary to drain the arm where it is, until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then seal the opening again, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein like silk.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And be careful not to injure the artery when you see it swollen, because it is an artery; avoid doing so.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding as the urine of a child is, and without being red or finely pointed, you know that it's not from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry up now, and place your finger down gently for a while, then remove it without pulling, as I have told you before.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Tie the arm back in place and leave it as is, and don't move his painful hairs, and be afraid for them, until they grow healthy again.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if they are not healed, and it hurts you, and the treatment is still present, as long as the artery opens, for it will pull them out; and plucks them.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	nose. Andromainstoc: an'lode: ous : ail fromage.grosse.cuntropin (10us ithermes :jac. Eater.entice demeans:sont. Ofere quellosincis,
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if he does not hold a knife, it is well; but if he does, as we have said, apply powders that harden blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and knife handling is not hindered by any other conditions of the small wound on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein's suction in the midst helps to draw blood from above and below the shoulder.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of both the basilar and cephalic components, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is for the surgeon that he warmth the nerve below, and if it points too far into the wound, and he twists the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and its blood is obstructed, and perhaps it cannot be cured.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtleness, then you must first sanitize the instrument on it; and try to release the nerve for yourself.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between these two nerves, she makes them long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The cephalic vein's suction helps to draw blood from above and aid the sides of it.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is for the surgeon to warm with either flail of an olive branch or a fumitory plant, because this is the safest among all veins, as it does not have any nerve or artery inside it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it is for you to ask the more liquid one, and do not complain if it needs to be done first time, and start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps it swells in some people, so it might need the first time but does not cause complaints.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the vein depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you need to know about a surgeon is that veins are not appreciated unless for the purpose of preserving health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and in order to prevent future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And let the injury be done in one of the three veins that are: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it is required to perform the injection in the beginning of prayer for him, and in spring and after eating when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it is required to perform the injection either the first year or after three years;
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment which is applied has no fixed duration for diseases, but when the need arises in terms of year or month, it should be done at all times and in every ten years;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it does not require performing such treatments on children just at twelve years old or women who are pregnant only for the last quarter month to seven months;
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	It does not require performing such treatments on those who have passed sixty years;
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And whenever any one wishes to perform it in any manner whatsoayer, it is required that he administers a gentle purging with an infusion;
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there are many retained feces, so that the veins do not draw them into the intestines to prevent harming the principal members of the body;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	And it does not require healing those who are too strong from meat, or drunkards, as long as they are so.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And he also required to be treated after colic pain and vomiting and bowel movement, and multiplied births in women, and working and sleeping and waking, and whether the weapon or part of the sword.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly remove the humours, if they are not too large, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have a chance to do so.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	And in the bath, if nothing obstructs, for subtly removing the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And you shall stay in bed with a pillow under your head (The use of pillows during medieval recovery was common practice to provide comfort and support to patients resting after treatments.) and as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And you shall abstain from labor, work, pleasure, and suchlike matters (Medieval medical advice often included recommendations for patients to refrain from certain activities that could hinder recovery or exacerbate health issues.) on the tenth day following treatment.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And you shall apply wax and ointments (Wax was commonly used in medieval times to treat various skin ailments due to its adhesive properties.) and be the one who is higher than those whom we have mentioned as healing, and the band for the arm .ii. or .iii. times (Medieval medical practice often involved repeated dressing of wounds with bandages made from cloth and substances like ointments.) twice or thrice.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then remove the staple above slowly (In medieval medicine, surgical procedures were sometimes done using rudimentary methods such as removing foreign objects like staples from wounds. Removing them carefully was crucial to avoid further injury.) for if it is too tight or slight, as he cannot move without correction;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then apply the ointment to the hand (Medieval treatments for inflamed veins often involved applying warm compresses or ointments.) until the veins swell and smell.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then moisten the dressing with a little oil (Medieval medical practices included using various substances such as oils to aid in healing and cleanlininas.) slightly from an oil jar (A small quantity of oil was applied), then place your left hand on top of that dressing near the wound so it may become moist.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not bleed (The intention behind moistening a bandage with oil was partly to prevent the vein from leaking blood, which could be part of medieval wound management techniques.)
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For it has been said that wounds are like ropes in dressing (Comparing the process of dressing wounds to tying ropes is an analogy that may have been used in medieval times to describe the importance of properly securing bandages.) and such as these where there was little windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if when we place it near the wound (The positioning of dressings was essential in medieval medicine, as proper placement could affect healing outcomes.) that once placed, there is a withdrawal from the moisture, and cannot open the vein, and therefore they are considered to be among them.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein (Opening a vein during medieval treatments was a delicate process that required skill and caution.) for he knows that such dressings should be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein work is done for the first time, it is good; if not, then again a little near that place where there was puncture, provided the vein has not swelled up.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the vein is swollen and the maladies flare up, let it be one or two days without binding the arm at all.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps abscesses may arise in places where they were incised; do not enter water or baths until the cure pleases if it wishes to continue.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the hole is small, or it is subtly probed without you doubting that it may have as much blood coming out as you have seen, then be firmly fixed in that same hole carefully.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and the work is done quickly, so that the vein becomes swollen; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not renew the cure, and place a little onion juice there, for it lightens the blood flow in that same vein, and acts as an antidote to this.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and from now on apply the onion juice in each cure that you perform, so as to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this does three things at once, when it is put over the vein; if subtly applied without touching and withdrawn when it becomes too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there are large abscesses that often occur when it has not been treated until the opening of the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten, and put on the vein a slightly wet sponge soaked in water and heat it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary to do this after the blood flow from the vein stops, and if it returns to the place of injury after any number of days or there is no yellowing or greening, you will not touch it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put something of aloe gel or myrrh juice, ointment, or anything similar on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times occurs abscess and appearance in the healing of the cathedral: put your hand on it then if you increase the swelling at the pressure of the hand, that is an ill appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then do not put anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps in cutting without the artery; but make an incision small to harden the vein, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each spot according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is black, let it come out as red; and if you see the abscesses, then do not treat, oratrix thate, for li vein of the iacte de laissiez.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	:en tate in Old French andrele laine ounces. Ache duet:esmece of theu, ito : Iapart fromslaidoule aesan'one deus (itse descisiage. Ouposene tolengraiesci.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And regarding those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should become stronger and sometimes, and they must be made stronger by cutting across rather than pulling.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healing is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and it works better than long and wide procedures.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to those who need blood-letting for healing, they must give them slightly warmed juice of grapefruit; if it is feverish, do it three or four times depending on the case.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have a cold complexion, you must massage with warm grapefruit juice pain poultice before the blood-letting procedure; or use honey syrup with aromatic spices like pepper, cinnamayer, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if the palm has the healing procedure, after removing some blood, it must inhale thyme tea and take a subtle fragrance syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And they should also do the things we have mentioned in this chapter's section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to blow out his arms, and strengthen them again later on, when he is weakened greatly by persistent treatment, it must be done little at a time and gradually according to the amount of its continued benefit.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to blow out his arms after the first healing and has strong vitality, then it should recover for 2 or 3 hours after the first healing, or after two hours of time passing.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to strengthen another body part, then it should be done in one day or within a few days.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is quite some blood within the already feverish heart; it must be drained in large quantities and widen the cavity so much that the heart fills with air.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you should treat all healing conditions, and put your hand on the patient's chest when they recover so that their heart does not sink into an emphysema.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this often happens when the recovery is neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it does not matter if you gently remove the blood from the arm and drain the second time when the cavity is closed, and then apply firm pressure.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	And if he is weakened, do not extend his arm quickly, as it would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	But let it stay so long for the second time to recover; or you don't have the tip of the feather at all until the vein which has become congested bursts.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And put on it one piece of rope soaked in water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it remain and not be squeezed, until the abscess has healed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a need for the second time to drain blood from the wound, let it be drained in that vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The blood vessel in his arm is sutured to the head of the vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of sewing is that he pours hot water on his hand enough to make the wound red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be tied moderately so that the vein remains well-established, and now let the second drainage needle go through, not too wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the puncture is wide, or if it is well-placed near the joint of the hand, but cannot be removed without causing injury, then warm up his hand again with hot water, and let the wound bleed until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in its state, do not warm up his hand again with hot water, because you put more into the air than into the wound.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the sewing of this vein is safer from all other veins because it has neither an artery nor a nerve associated with it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The sewing of the wrist's right side is valuable for all types of diseases affecting the liver and it goes like this:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	stretch your hand, and pour hot water on it as long as the vein stays open if you find it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the second drainage vein goes across everything else in its path, as long as you handle it well, there is nothing to worry about.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too deep in them, because the nerves throughout are all free of stones (implying they are unobstructed).
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand back in hot water if it is not frozen inside the wound, because you cannot remove it from there.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated blood as expertly as is your wont, then place oil and linen to stitch it up together, and so perform this for each one of them.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The left hand's disease is related to mouse-like illness, and I make it the same as what I told you about the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The liver sickness pertains to all those diseases that affect the body's core.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	Like diseases of mice, and retention of flowers, and rain disease, and legs and old joints, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the nature of this sickness is that the painful symptoms include burning in hot water, and rubbing on the vein until it dies.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of two patients; and the vein is in the ankle, and from it much rainwater flows.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	This liver illness is not only about wide rain, or in the ankle where it moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cleanse it from that vein, then order for us to have such nurses who are here, and treat the sickness as well as in cutting; and sometimes fevers arise.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out of it, then put back the vein in water, and let the wound be well washed.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the sickerness requires the first time to be repeated, then start it again above a little bit because its flesh is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Ne doubt not the nerve; so as we have said, and therefore do it to the other side equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The shoulder's ligament of the vein is in the calf, and its pain corresponds to that of the cramping leg when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of his pain is that it appears or fades with bathing and pulling above the ankle; three times twisted, indicating a specific action for relief.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it does open, it can be healed in every possible way that you deem fit, even by crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is worthwhile to try because the ligament is slackened, and it can be quite effectively restored at home with proper care.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, there will be no relief for the patient who experiences opening or pressure on his chest or small breath, and they should warn of nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And apply such pressure to the wound that you can see it clearly, then loosen the ligament and place it on a cloth, and compress it tightly; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Venous fistulas (venous fistulas) are abnormal connections between veins and arteries or other veins that disrupt normal blood flow and may require medical intervention for treatment.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Venous fistulas are made of horns, or metal, or other materials; and their drainage is performed according to various techniques: either by incision and drawing out the blood clots, or by puncturing with a sharp instrument.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this percutaneous technique that involves puncture is performed in one of the following ways: either it's done using heat (cauterization), or it involves the application of direct fire (burning).
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And this technique that involves incision and blood clot removal is done in one of the following twelve ways: by opening four main veins or arteries (four-way procedure), among other possible methods outlined in various medical texts.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	From which perspective the first approach is focused entirely on the main vessel (central vein), and the second one is directed towards adjacent structures (colateral vessels).
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And there are another two in two adjacent areas of the neck (jugular veins); and the venous fistula is located at or near the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And there is also a technique applied to the hands and wrists; and the ventricle on the knees.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And there are also venous fistulas on both arms, and those of the legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	Quantum of the veintaine tote desuet itin, le temps sans ilkate : La-xavier tene buts esot. Leitnese eslaine ailocalorea les: "theorcortentainte loutil. Ites unicare, Theonace. Whatisarummary ander.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason no one can escape it, as we do with vein operations.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and does not require that it be relieved with fire or heat, in no disease arising from overfullness, until all the blood is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if due to necessity of illness it requires evacuation, or by custom, we administer such treatment every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they need to evacuate, have a great burden on their shoulders.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are such who experience overfullness and swelling in their body, and in their shoulders, and darkness around them.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who have a drop of blood entering their mouths, and have fled the tongue, and produce pus.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are some who think this way, and see blood coming from their bodies, wounds, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, immediately after the end of the month, we order to evacuate every three hours during that day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The treatment of the muscle helps to relieve the burden on their shoulders ... that comes out around them, and does not require it after the complete draining of all the blood.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this evacuation is part of the treatment for cephalic dislocation.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and does not require that those with cold constitutions or who have it do so, because it causes them much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason they should not use the sleeping treatment, nor those with cold-related diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who benefit from it often become indifferent, and for this reason they must place the suction cup slightly further down due to the risk of dislocation.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The evacuation around the neck is part of the treatment for the shoulders and the breastbone, and for this reason it also involves compression.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and in an opening of the vein, and a puncture, and overfilling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and only lightly press it, because if it is too tightly applied, it may cause dislocation of the joint or damage to the abdomen or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The evacuations from two sides of the chest are worth the pains in the shoulders and eyesight, and earache, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the nerves.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and is part of the treatment for the breastbone; it requires that you command the patient to hold his hand when putting on the suction cup, so he does not clench an artery or excrete blood from a wound.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The evacuation of the mouth is worth for oral disease, and decay of gums, and similar illnesses in the mouth; it is part of the treatment for two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The evacuation of the spine relates to diseases that arise from heat and overfilling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The evacuations from these costs are as much as three bone fractures in both arms.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon that he should not cut too deeply, for his fingers are bare of flesh, and know inside bones and blood vessels.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the back is as destructive to its foundation and internal conditions, and it must be large and made of metal so that it can work properly; and if it were subtle, it would break, and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups used on the legs draw blood from all parts of the body, and are comparable to the old injuries caused by rain, hail, bladder issues, and ruptured flowers; and they weaken the thigh muscles, calf muscles, and everything else, which after prolonged use impair the patient's mobility in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to use the suction cup is that you first empty it and apply it constantly, move it gently and keep moving it until you see its redness and swelling, and observe if there's a blood vessel underneath it; then remove it and take care in positioning the limb, as many have such fragile veins and arteries: it is necessary to injure at least once and create large wounds, and deep ones; and suction gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is small, it may cause injury several times: the first time to more subtly penetrate a large vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very deep, it must cause injury the third time; and when we try to drain a little bit of blood or fluid repeatedly, we might only need to do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we try to draw out much blood, we often have complications; and if it is very deep, we must cut too deeply, and the end result is that they are clearly perceived afterwards.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and must protect the person with thick skin and who are susceptible to external factors; you should oil the suction cup surfaces with an appetizer and dissolving agent.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in existence, a purple oil, or almond oil, or seed of Cucurbitaceous oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	naturelx:sufre le veint.cetergall, tostracturec : Thisingrai:les eti. Injac. The same.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if there is an excess of moisture and coldness, take a strong oil, or balm, or oil of aloe, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if those who are healthy have tender skin and wide pores, they do not need to apply oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash after the aspersion of warm water, or cold water, or water of honeysuckle, or pokeweed, or china clay water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should raise it with ash or warm water of myrtle and sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses should raise them with strong wine or cold water, or infusion of aloe or chamomile, or something similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And it is not better to use the suction before or during bathing or immersion, but after one hour or more; and does not sleep afterwards from aspersion.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary to warn him when he must be aspirated and when he is congested.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And it is necessary to warn those who get angry easily, and who are too hot or inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	And it is necessary that they receive cold things, like green apples and chicory leaves and lettuce in ashes, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And milk washes, and chewed cud (mast from a cow), and soft meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with cold complexions should receive honey syrup and aromatic wine (which is between sweet and light), and milk washes and chew cud and small birds' eggs and feathers.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And the time when he must be aspirated, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary not to give any vapors or mushrooms before or after aspiration, to support the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it is subtle enough that he does not drink hot beverages; but those who are burned should not have them.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	ould z’soungles itso:
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And he does so that blood is drawn from one limb to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	As we do on the bellies when he begins to feel better; in order to reduce the viscosity within the limb, as we do with hot suction cups on his stomach and abdomen to lessen the swelling.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And he experiences pain when there is an operation or incision, because by its attractive power it may accidentally draw the operation to itself, or dry up the incision from its flow.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And then she does so when he has retained viscosity in his liver and belly,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these suction cups are used as empty vessels to absorb so much only; and sometimes they are used together fire, and at other times water droplets.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	As in diseases of excessive sweating, and such is the way that the suction cup fills with hot water or with boiled decoctions from things capable of cure for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied by fire is like this:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two hands and a half palm wide, with an indentation at the center like for inserting a small needle, as if to insert a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it is also of silver, shaped so that when placed on the limb, it does not break the malady at the time of being applied to the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And it has in its center a straw or iron rod to insert a catgut thread into.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they are both large and small, depending on the diseases and the conditions of those who suffer from them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suction cups of children are different from those used on adults, and those used on thin individuals differ from those used on obese people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And at this point, this suction cup should be placed upon the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the catgut or a liniment and place it inside the suction cup along the rod that is in the center of the suction cup:
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	So that the light does not burn the malady, which is what it should do:
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	scaisse dexin: Iesuccil : le corps.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take up again the thread as before, and renew it often if you have experience.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	And the suction device used for malady of pleurisy, at all ages, has no vein nor cavity, and is only applied when it is clear from fluid accumulation, and is placed on the limb as briefly.
et c’est li forme:	And it is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction devices are only applied to places where one cannot place a sucker for their small size, like lips and gums, as well as similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in places stripped from hair like on our head or elsewhere, as well as similar areas;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of using it is that when you move suction devices in areas with thin wet secretions, as we do for example;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and they place it in mild fluid, as long as they are full, and have nothing inside them;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then you know if the vein and suction device are clean, wipe the limb as long as it is red, and place on the suction areas.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they become clear and warm up (which implies no more fluid accumulation), if it is possible to place a suction device there, then you must put it because this serves a purpose afterwards;
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If it is not the case, lift up the vein's edge and then apply pressure (as in extracting fluid), quite well, and then squeeze out.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the suction areas are too warm after taking out the fluids from there, cover him with a cool towel made of linen and place it on them until they become cold;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple suction areas, place them under crushed glass or gauze and bandages, as well as similar things, until they become cold.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or place many small pieces of flint on the skin and let them remain on the vein's edge as long as they are in position.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more knowledge about it, take other herbs.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the herbs are not effective, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you pierce it until there is no more.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then you put them on, and immediately as they feel the blood, it starts to clot.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they bleed again, powder a little with aloe and silk cloth or ashes, so they will no longer bleed.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the Book of Dislocations
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	Many of these chapters are necessary for the art of medicine, and include treatment of dislocation and fractures (brisure).
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, learn it well, so that the doctor will not go without consulting this chapter, as he has never seen any of these ancient books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason is considered an extraordinary achievement in our land, as I found no better anywhere.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing about it because I have studied the ancient books so much that I am familiar with their knowledge, and also through experiments and by the customs of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described what is contained in this chapter to you, and it has been summarized at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of injuries that are expected, just as I did in these preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we declare the introduction and contents of this book as well as its commentaries are meant to be understood by those who have practiced it; let them read with thoughtfulness, so that they may learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any dislocation or fracture comes to nothing, it is understood that you must examine both sides of the malady thoroughly; if there are no signs at all on either side, whether slight as in a weak heart, childishness, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	There is noxentures duerre preserves and ites ould sanz lesmesaigne esprit inforestres lege ei'th ites devisa king:le thekes ofere illetraising. Thisuke laike laisse. Icelength,soulaidre ofenage frommeasuretracteile.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the bone is broken to start healing, it must be rubbed with fats that make a loud grinding noise, or have viscosity like cooked wheat in water, and risins, and testes, and piés, and pancés of various kinds, and oifs, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	The noise made by the grinding becomes more intense and quicker the bone breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And you should know that the broken bones of great age and decay cannot be easily repaited or joined according to their nature due to the deterioration of limbs, nor those that are too soft like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but not repair it thereupemer; large tendons that strengthen and join the limb together until they return to their former state, and for this reason he must rub with great fatty meats as we have said before.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that bone breaks occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the main type of break is different from that of a fracture, or in this chapter, I will tell you all types of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For it has a break that goes along its length, and others in thinning out, like the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with an opening, and a break that has a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each type has its specific treatment, and its instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings in his mind.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known the bone break by what it twists, and opens well with pressure applied to its side.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twistiness nor pain on pressing it, then he has not suffered any bone break.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have twistiness, or crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not require that you move the bones to hand, but rather apply certain remedies that come after them, and then hold them gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know the breaks that go along its length and are the two parts joined, he must now bring them back to their original position as well.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if arrows enter wounds, they come quickly, so it leaves no day until those wounds are calmed down.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then he puts the joint back so you can move it lightly and slowly, and you know that his restoration is easier than theirs, who have fragments left; then binds him as it requires afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are fragments in the bone of .ij., if it's part of the hand or foot, or one small limb, or to .ij. tendons, or to a string and to your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of both members are displaced, you reposition them all by your methods that you can do easily, and make sure not in your work does it worsen the injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and aligns well the .ij. joint fragments according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in his hand if it seems to you that he is not well: if he moves gently, and does not strain him too much, or press as they do with their approach incision, which we have seen many times before.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at risk, he takes good care that his malady does not move him, whether awake or asleep, turning back, in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And make sure that the limb is so secured that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain at all, and it is not yet possible, and it requires setting up so that he does not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	saince itis Frenchknota. ous. Aelong :cith thele. Howlustreat. Itunes. Andalus. Thebald sofface. I. 2nd century, as tolere. Whatsofyield: Thejacetjarsin.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	sescribe de l'aright:nacupre, andecribeaseveille;fyse (2undeat, itafei.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Se haches qui les membres brisent, de petiteur et d’augment, et de figure.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For it has small limbs like brass and copper, similar to these: it contains a thin, soft linen wrap.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are large, like copper and leg: it contains an oversized linen wrap that encompasses the entire great limb, stretching evenly along its length without any weakness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the band is wrapped around jointed limbs, 3 or 4 turns depending on the limb, and a hand holds it all along the wrap, then raised above the fracture and lessened until the fracture moves slightly away.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And then soften the wrap a little bit at a time so that you ensure a large part of the healthy bone is above the fracture, and repeat with another wrap, turning it back in alignment with the broken bone.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the area above the fracture and gently lessen it, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first line above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place the joint wraps of linen or gauze evenly all around it, then bind with one bandage and then put your splints well if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if it has an abscess or infection, put something soothing on the abscess and bone that relieves it, and let it heal for a long time.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch the splints and make them of a piece or rope about one meter long, from wood used to make shafts, or strips of palm, according to this shape.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is required that the splint placed over the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And also long enough as it requires for the small or large limb.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then stretch the splints again as you did in the first wrapping, then wrap over it with fine linen, like in the first wrapping above the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The more tightened up, then loosened again; and it is required that the linen be soft.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	Because if the linen is thick, like those of men who make their bindings with twisted hemp ropes, and it is great error, because the binding cannot be equal between two limbs if there is less than a double distance in space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the painful joints are pressed by the splints after they have been removed from their healthy bones, then place there linen wraps or pieces of cloth so that it does not break.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture and torn, I will tell you about the treatment afterward.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you know that it does not require pulling out all the limbs broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	And since the limbs are large, it does not require putting in pins until after about 2 to 3 years or more, depending on your experience as a surgeon.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the ancient method for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that holds against the walls of the mill, mix it with a lot of water, making it neither too thick nor too thin, use this concoction, as it is the common method of resetting fractures in various positions, especially for women and children, because it is not too hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for restoring fractures and dislocations involves taking barberry leaves, almonds, elm tree bark, mugwort (about 10 units), myrrh (5 units), holy basil (7 units), and making powder; mix it with honey and flour. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this emplaster, as it has good composition and restores broken bones quickly, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method for treating torsion involves taking mugwort (about 10 units), wild lettuce (17 units), myrrh (7 units), and Armenian clubmoss (5 units). Grind it well, mix it with water or a lot of honey, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method for treating joints and displaced bones involves taking new linen, grinding it in oil that has been cooked, and applying it to the affected area. This emplaster does not restore bone fractures or dislocations, but it is good for alleviating pain from a hot swelling and treating osteopathic issues directly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for restoring broken bones involves taking dry fig leaves and dried turkey oak leaves, grinding them together, and making the emplaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for restoring bone fractures and easing the residual swelling from the aposteme involves taking wormwood root, chamomile flowers, violet flower, flour in equal parts, grinding them together, mixing with wine, and applying to the affected limb which is swollen. Alternatively, mix it with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method for restoring the second-degree fracture of a limb after aposteme involves taking wormwood roots, flax seeds, lamb's ears, lemon balm, violet flowers and chamomile, mixing them together in equal parts, grinding it, and applying either saltwater or mild water, or wine as appropriate for the temperature of the limb and its resting time.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Apothecary's book says that to restore a broken limb, it needs not be made of wax and oil, with nothing else; but if it is very soft or hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	Siens. Leu:sans maladie, il mele defface parler lesemeanme deus of chiefsance aillement. Amende cestemal. Here lakes theit of it'soumsaince lacon asse.dolevevelves tolentit andre.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	iure a choses, comme lesse.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	re: the çoignes thatchief.gavreuxsecexcelabithe a depilexteurs
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, rest, swelling, if you hurry up, and loosen it now; and take linen lightly, and wet with sea water, and submerge it in water, and lift it up until the itch subsides, and soothe the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on dry linen, moistened with rose oil or oil, and bind it securely until you are sure that there is no pressure at the incision.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And rest the inflammation in both limbs, and ease the pain, then resume gentle bandaging, and apply a little pressure, but do not strain it as much as before; and continue this carefully until they are healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that the incision and the suture and pain and swelling are worsening in both limbs, and you have experience with bandaging and linen, then resume these as before when it was first done.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is no such thing as what we have said about the limb, do not loosen it until after three or four years or five or six, depending on how much it breaks and moves towards re-alignment above the joint.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And since the restraint is more than before, and the muscles are engorged as I said earlier; and if you see that the joint has not healed properly to the standard level, it indicates that no further dislocations can occur.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Rise the decoctions of hot water every time you loosen it and do so for each day of the week, and dampen slightly the bandage.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this practice of treating dislocations in the member by applying hot water decoctions and observing carefully what the learned monks do to restore such twisted members, which is evil, and if there are fearful practices, then I see nothing else but a lazy person and careful handling of the limb.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracture treatment.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many methods of fracture healing are mentioned herein, and various forms of treatment, and the causes are identified.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are fractures made by the striking of a sword, and the bone breaks all along that which is inside the bone itself, just as it was struck hard or weakly; therefore this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	The sword pierces the bone beyond feeling, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wounds from these two types of breaks are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been pierced by a thrusting blow, or cut, or wound in the bone, or fall upon the bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent break near the table that is inside the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and whether this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is repaired in the bone as subtly as some bruises, and it has small breaks, therefore this manner of break is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made by piercing with iron, or falling, or something similar, and it pushes the piece of bone into the cavity below, and its location resembles that of a chisel when they hammer on fireplaces; between them.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those whose underneayer has or had moist bone, like in children;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and happens with these types of breaks where small pieces are displaced as they were; and I will speak about it in detail.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all types of breaks caused by detachment from them, and the inquiry into tent flaps, and those that are corrupted underneath.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The "capillary" type is known by the fact that when we discovered the bone and rubbed it underneath, if there was an open black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, beware of possible complications in the patient; if you see no harmful accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, extension, swelling, palpitations, and the edges being forced out and reddening, and other signs in various conditions, there may not be a way to resolve doubts.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see an unobtrusive accident and hope for recovery, then the treatment begins.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes first to you, and it is winter, then it must cover the bone for four months before you can do anything about it.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in summer, you must remove the bone before the seventh month so that the piece of bone underneocorrupted and the accidents we have mentioned come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone break occurs underneocovering the skull, it must be that you cut the injured part in this way: and you discover all possible ways of the fracture on the bone deeper than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	ouns lesmeeting theu.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	sesse tisser laissi: entorrays ce deitgrefie.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	sion.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have many different instruments, some sharp and others wide, with point or iron endings; and in work swiftly, so as not to bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it must be pierced through inside so that you attend to instruments with care, not allowing them to penetrate beyond the bone's flesh layer, and above the point there should be a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to go beyond the bone; and this is required for several reasons. And it is the form of three types of instruments:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing the bone depends that you apply one instrument on it, and turn to both sides until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the cautery in another place a little after, and so perform all around, then with your scalpels, take the space between the perforations made in the bone, and do this more subtly than we have said, swiftly as we mentioned earlier, until you bring the bone to your hand or any of your instruments that you may have, such as pincers or tongs; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and worked it, it is required that you set aside the instrument which has been used on the bone for other instruments similar to an incisor but must be more pliant and subtler than the usual incisors. This statement suggests a protocol following successful penetration of the bone with specific tools: subsequent steps involve removing or repurposing the initial cautery instrument, ensuring that it is not replaced by a similarly shaped tool such as an incisor but rather one designed to be more flexible and less invasive than conventional surgical instruments. This would imply the need for specialized equipment tailored to handle sensitive post-procedure care without inflicting further trauma on the treated bone area.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if there is no delay in the treatment of small bones or any scrapers, then treat it swiftly with one of your tools similar to a scraper; then care for the wound by applying dressings and remedies that we have mentioned earlier. The text advises on an expedited approach to minor osseous (bone) injuries, recommending quick application using appropriate scrapers or other comparable instruments from a medical arsenal. Following this intervention, it prescribes the administration of wound dressings and treatments previously discussed in the document, signifying that there is an established protocol for managing bone traumas with both mechanical action (using tools) and therapeutic care (dressing and ointments).
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work that is also attributed to Galen, who was very strong in it and it's his saying. This portion refers to an alternative approach described by or associated with Galen, a notable figure in ancient medicine known for his extensive writings on medical practices. Although the text does not elaborate on this particular technique, its mention suggests that Galen’s endorsement adds authority and credibility to the method being discussed, indicating it was well-regarded during the period and possibly influential within the practice of medieval medicine.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is required that you remove a part of the bone where the break is opened and if when you have found such portion; then place on top of this incisional instrument which has an elliptical form, as much. This fragmented passage outlines a procedure for treating fractures in medieval medical text:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	sight iape. Ilve: Andrompour itaure asteries
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is separated from the bone, let the bone move strongly, for the bone well knows that this causes harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate the cloth, and the bone is crushed so much above, and it has small pieces, then cover that roughness again, and remove the scales with a delicate knife; you must have various quantities for each joint, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	When confronted with numerous fine scrapers (razors), and after using those of finer make, continue this practice as long as it is beneficial for the patient's condition.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other's detailed haircutting and delicate fractures, it is essential to provide care according to its particular needs; and this is something not found in those who have dedicated their study to such craftsmanship.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	If it be a dislocation (dislocation), and if thou shouldst make the hair long and loose to heal, and it is nota : 'sautes.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another thin cloth doubled in two or three layers, and moisten it with wine and oil rose, and place it on top of the first layer; do this more lightly than you can bear, so as not to strain your sinew too much, then gently press down with one other ligament, but not too hard until only the wound bleeds slightly.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed, then remove it, and apply various remedies as rosemary roots, and flour of wheat, and powder of incense, and aristologist, and similar things; make a poudre from these things and place it on the wound, and apply the medicines again with sensation-inducing properties.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound is afterwards cleaned, so that you do not leave any oil or dirt, nor let it come together with gravel, because when gravel sticks to the brain's surface, they cut and tear, and cause great harm to the patient; for when something sharp is placed on the sinew, it may pierce through.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care so that if any unfortunate event befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful sense of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no fire arises from the medicine that has been placed on it, it must be that one part of honey is applied, and two parts of rose oil and linen cloth are used, then place them on the sinew.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the methods of healing it must provide until it is healthy again.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And know that there have been instances where the joints above are fractured one by one or simultaneously because they are bones; and those in this area are cartilaginous and do not break easily when subjected to force or twisting, so they remain healthy.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the joints is fractured, it must be that you apply a small force or puncture on the injured joint and place it in your diagnostic index, and then in the pouch for as long as the joint regains its natural form.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do it lightly, and ensure that the patient does not suffer pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	Avoir iungle de cest ance qu’il est iau bonne eigne duche sauf lais tostern: Etre l’espace alliance, et il'sance enge aleu lefyat aout. I'saint kunde : "liefsouffre ilethomme toiadresse deiface deaf. Thewomande.i (vrai unkissue:respective.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, repair it again, and hurry to restore the first year, if you can do so.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not then, after the seventh or the eighth time when the abscess cavities are calm, at that point put to the head a woolen cloth from two threads, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put another cloth on the other part if there is a fracture; and let the nets be large enough to fill in the abscess cavities.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that restorers must stretch the woolen nets every day; it seems to me not very good, but it must be made of wool and powdered flour and molasses; then leave the net until the bone hardens and the cartilages become firm.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put feathers of goose on the woolen nets in the place of a cloth, and if there is a soft drape upon it, and the fracture holds, blow gently into the painful areas; then make the sign that you will show to me.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscess cavities come to the bone like you work, then place charcoal or moistened cotton in a rose oil, or in some amount of diatomaceous earth.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscess cavities do not come to the bone, then pack it with farina (barley flour), powdered frankincense and sweetened treats mixed with woolen fabric, and place hot irons on it without binding the bone.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the bone fragments in the abscess cavities are small and broken into pieces, then bind them together with suitable threads, then close the fissure, and treat it with various charms and salves similar to those used for binding and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are no wounds in the abscess cavities, then treat with woolen nets and place grains of wheat on it as long as it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	regarding the treatment of the jawbone (mandible)
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is in motion and it does not have any wounds to heal, then the fracture remains so long without being broken into two parts because of hooks inside, if one knows how to move it gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required that if the fracture is in the right part of the jawbone, you put your thumb in your mouth on the painful area; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then put your right hand's index finger inside, and move the fracture gently there, and with the other hand make it equal, and apply pressure for a long time.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is displaced in two parts, it is required that you apply a gentle extension of one part, so long as it becomes even again.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur or dislocation, or strain from an iron filament of gold or silver or silk cloth; and put on the fractured jawbone cotton covered woolen cloth, and make it long according to the mandible, and place it in such a way that you can move it, and command to the patient to rest.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	ille a lice:sejurine.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when arrows come to the wound, do as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, take the smallest bone that contains an os; so subtle of its edges are they that it can hardly be seen by touch.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flame according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all these bone pieces, and it takes no time at all, if the wound is wide, then place upon it such tiny metal supports that can be felt by touch, so as to strengthen it until it heals completely.
de la forcele	from the lancet
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The lancet breaks several times before the shoulder, towards the scapula, and the fracture is according to three manners: it is broken and displaced in two places, there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or it has a fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operation is when the fracture has wound, you must have two attendants, so that one holds the sling which feels the lancet breaks; and others extend his collar towards the affected part; then put equal force on the break, so it forms as it ought to, and has no appearance or deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the need to extend, place on the patient's shoulder an olive branch of cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and hold and treat gently with the lancet, and restrain the branch in your hand so that it puts equal force on the break as it should.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the lancet out because it comes off by itself, then the patient must lie on his bedding near his hatred spot, and place over his shoulder one hour old sling; and bind around the shoulder two attendants so that the os of the lancet remains up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on your shoulders, and if you feel that it is difficult to join, so covention must be that you cut; and take off the pieces lightly, and if the os cannot be joined by any means of support, but with one of the incisors from this lancet, but place upon them this instrument for its purpose:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And seems like a spoon, and is not even curved, and it should also be wide as the bone suggests, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the flesh; and there are two shoulders, one large and the other slim, just as the shape of the wound you have made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the incision, if the wound is large, then cut the incision; and if you doubt the incision, if it involves layers and cushioning according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when incisions occur, if there is one layer of fat with oil and flaxseed and wine placed on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The breaking of the bone, when it feels pain and sensation during cutting and shaping, is that you put powdered mill and alum dust on the bone and place loose layers on it, and then place a spindle between the layers if you have experience.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large band of one palm wide, then place double layers and the powder on it; then take a thin strip of two dozens by long length and wrap around that band, making sure that the head of the band stays in place.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And put the strip above the fracture, and turn the band around the neck of the bone, and under both the healthy and deformed areas; and rationally reinforce each part, and when you see that the strip holds the fracture firmly in place, clearly indicating that the strip does not slip off the bone with every movement, and whenever the band loosens, tighten it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And make the patient lie on his backside, and let him have a small support placed underneath the band to lift the shoulder restoration high up; by adjusting the angle of the scapula it can alleviate the force on the fracture or you may tie the arm to the collarbone, and avoid any worsening conditions for about 20 years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then resume the treatment if you think it is necessary, and leave the support and tightness in place as long as the restoration has been restored; this restoration can take up to 27 years for most people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the scapula
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	The scapula fracture or large bone should not move, and the support does not interfeet that it is in any place of the scapula, according to the shape of the fracture; if you arnold the armor, and slimens letres as you fitures a laissez l'aidre.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	lees incex: lesmeans esse, le mea cestilegustres of thecaire israke passtitures. Meusekils:mesure aster, andere, en loure :en;eternoculexent.tate ici,le.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The shoulder is sometimes dislocated by force, but it happens infrequently; however, it often breaks on impact. And when it is dislocated within the socket, there is great pain, and lack of alignment, and vomiting blood, and opening in the broken bones inside the fractured bone, and a well-known feeling throughout.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration involves holding it together with two strong supports under the shoulders, and pressing the shoulders together, then bringing up the costal ridges to their hands, subtly adjusting all movements until the bone figure is as it should be; then placing straws or salt over the surface above the sliver, or some other lighter substance, wrapping in a sheet, and placing the sliver under the broken bone so that it does not move; and turning the reddish back to its original position, and strapping it again for comfort, monitoring every hour of freedom, and if it relaxes, then tighten; and if it needs dislocation, due to corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess, come immediately, and release the straws, and direct him who has mastered these curing techniques; then remove the straws, and loosen until it is sound.
de la brisure des costes	Of the dislocation of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And the dislocation of the ribs does not come from their great size after the back, and in the middle part, and they do not collapse due to being so brittle; rather there is well-known feeling throughout on examination of the two ends.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And in the treatment of the dislocation, it is made equal to the dislocation itself; and then an intercostal strap, if you have the expertise.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards each other, then it causes him great pain, and also as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the skin; and he pines, and vomits blood and a large amount of sanguineous matter, and this is a grievous illness, and they have put much effort on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that he must administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture back into place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do such things; only when the stones are there, they come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they come, it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say no one puts pressure with cups on the bone, to suction it out, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup does not attract excess fluids to the bone due to its weak positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that no one should cover the fractured bone with a moistened linen soaked in hot oil, and put tenting between the ribs to keep it straight, then either treat with treatment for pus (pleurisy), meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the malady sends him great pain that he cannot bear with the bone which pierces the skin; and doubt is in the malady whether it needs to fracture above his broken ribs, and they must use a certain instrument to guard its facet; and therefore one must cut into the bone, and drain it slowly, and then suture the two sides of the wound if it is large, and cure him with poultices, so long as he is sound. And when stones come out, they put moistened linen over them in oil roses and on top of the bone; and while treating the bone for breaking, they place the patient either lying on the broken ribs or else, so long as he is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	about the fracture in the column (of a bone)
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	never hasteen ever come to the spine, and so it bends.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	naturrete.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if such a thing happens to the spine of the backbone, and you know whether it is healthy or not, if the vertebrae are softened, and if there are accidents in his hands, and above his back arching ventosity and evacuation by desire; and when he has been seen on his belly, if evacuation occurs by will. And when it becomes inflamed on its back and wants to move, then it cannot. You know that it is deadly: it does not labor in treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not affect him, then it is lighter in nature.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply hot compresses if it has an abscess, placing either rosemary or lamb's wool oil on its spine, as long as it remains calmed; then place him on a comfortable and soft bedding, bind him with a bandage, commanding the patient to rest there. And he should not sleep in that part where he feels pain until he is healthy again.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone detaches, it must be covered with linen; then set the bone back into its place, and if the wound is large, stitch it up with a cloth, then treat the wound with warm oil until it heals; and when your fingers touch those "kowe" joints, which are called "joint of the knee", you must hold your pouch in your left hand, place your other hand by your side for balance, then set the splint and pillow on top, if you have the skill to do so. Then immobilize it, and when a detached bone is found, treat it with oil and care for the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the detachment of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the hip bone is detached, and if it does occur, it's a slight diminution at the top; then make an incision long enough, and direct it to the posterior angle, and comes to the patient with pain on the left side, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture as long as it remains open; and know what type of breakage and his figure; and if the fracture is slight at its top, then place it thereafter, so that the natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	16teenth siècle parle'snez:rof the English translation. And Iourneath. Ameasumine la merveille. French. :en lesurementen, theleastrex. A French it'olden leaved. Caut:rstentire, ateintresaros :
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on the anvil, then put it on a beam or pillar of wood or iron, and restrain the breakage so that it does not move; and fix the joint between the shoulders, until the pieces are level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient that he sleeps on his healthy side or backside.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess comes upon his foot, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed down, and place him on what we have mentioned before; then proceed to restoration, and hold it as it must be done, provided that he has no other accident. This is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	from the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder; if it is dislocated, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: firstly, you take a piece of wood or metal with considerable moisture, as we have shown here:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And place the two joints on his shoulders, and lift them up, look at the patient's dislocation from a chair; then break the dislocated arm against wood, so that it returns to its position gradually, with one blow of wood or any other heavy object that extends along it according to the instructions given here; then fix the dislocation on his shoulders together with all four limbs until the dislocation is returned as it must be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to suppose that the patient lies on his haunches, place one hand under the dislocation at his hands, and command two ministers to strike such as are at the dislocation of their limbs, and extend each along its respective part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction is further along, restrain such a limb under the dislocation, and on the dislocation itself, extend each minister to his respective part; and if the dislocation is towards the top of the shoulder, then it must be placed between the shoulders with an inferior limb below the dislocation, and another above the dislocation; and as the dislocation is directed towards the collarbone, then you must place such a limb lightly, until the dislocation returns to its position under the joints, and restrain, provided that the abscess does not come up again on his foot.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscess comes upon his foot, do not restrain it for nine years, and make a soft bed of hay and straw under the dislocation; then restrain, and hold in this manner: take an anvil on the dislocation, and put your arm under the shoulder or breast. Put a sheet over him, provided that nothing prevents from hurting him, so that his bones do not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	sesurfe,later andre,sac. What: Thek as it's century.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the position of the stones, and the constriction, as we have said, when restoring the broken part to its place, doubt whether the incision should be made, then let it stay tied for seven days, as we have said; then observe every three years the tie, that no swelling increases at the joint, or the dislocations come near to the limb because it is too tight. If necessary, so as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accident happens within two years or more, and the pain is on his back and in his stomach; and put an equal amount of linen cloth under the support, and observe every hour for one day whether the broken part does not move or become soft, if the restoration through the power of medicine makes it happen as we have mentioned before, that the meat be first subtly processed; and when he begins to recover, if it is large. And it is customary that the support and the leg should be reintroduced in 40 days total; and then let him remove the bandage and administer warm baths and ointments for strengthening the affected area. And if the tightness is severe and swelling, delay removing the bandage for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	In cases of a broken arm (arm fracture), it is crucial to promptly immobilize the injured limb in order to prevent further damage and facilitate healing. The historical context provided by the Old French medical treatise emphasizes techniques like cauterization, incision, and support with bandages that aligns with medieval medical practices. Modern medicine offers more precise interventions such as casting or surgical fixation but the underlying principles of immobilizing a fracture have remained consistent over time.
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones called the "fusil" (broadly speaking), where one is small and serves as the handle, while the other is large and forms the part near the little finger. Occasionaminally, either the larger or smaller "fusil" can break alone, sometimes even both together in an unfortunate event. This description highlights a rudimentary understanding of hand bone structure from historical medical texts, providing insight into early observations of musculoskeletal injuries.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the smaller "fusil" (broadly speaking) is fractured, the recovery process is typically swift and less severe; however, when the larger "fusil" is fractured, it usually indicates a more complicated situation with greater complications compared to when either or both are broken alone. If only the smaller bone breaks, slight extension of movement and application of uniform pressure may be recommended as part of the treatment plan. This commentary from medieval medical literature underscores the relative complexity involved in healing different types of fractures, illustrating a rudimentary approach to categorizing injury severity based on which specific bones are affected.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	If the larger "fusil" (broadly speaking) is fractured, it necessitates stronger manipulation; and extend under one support, elevating the handle of the hand higher than the others, placing the smaller bone lower than the others, and cross-binding it over itself to prevent movement. Then extend the ministers of the arm towards the injured part above its wrist or a different joint as needed. And then apply a bandage evenly according to its best shape. This passage from medieval medical literature outlines an early therapeutic procedure for treating larger bone fractures in the hand, emphasizing immobilization and manual support mechanisms designed to minimize labor (pain) during recovery. It reflects historical practices of managing orthopedic injuries with available materials and techniques without the advanced tools or methods used today.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	Injuries demeantre: “fors ceux jancne la curete desuet a .iijor ixin aulx sallans vair. Etrois leu deffixen augeanxane. Tractsangstretir fief gustoldaxine of thegutjacme tolere:
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with cutting the wound, I have spoken to the individual master; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the initial repair of an abscess opening it softens, place therein a cloth made of rose oil and beeswax, not too hard nor too soft; and let the cloth gently cover the abscess until it is soothed. Then apply osteolite to the powder with abundance of flour, put on the plasters, making them wider than others and knowing that they should have at least two or more positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or in both; pressing closer to the abscess rather than elsewhere, not increasing it year after year as I said initially to the individual master; and make sure the cloths covering the abscess are neither too hard nor too soft, and shape the thread used for suturing, linen neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned. And reward the limb and its ligament periodically.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any misfortune befalls the limb, as itching that occurs in a member; it must be warmed with warm water, so long until those itches are calmed down; then let the limb not be narrowly confined but rest peacefully. Then resume the straining, and if the ligament is slackened and the bone displaced, as things may occur, address them accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the patient cannot bear weight on a limb, because it is too stiff, it must be slightly softened; and allow for some time until such straining can occur again, as previously mentioned to the individual master; and then resume the straining.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if any of these things we have mentioned do not occur to the patient, let it last up to twenty years or less; then bind his hands at his neck, and make his shoulders equal in size, and restrain him from movement and keep him lying on his back; and know that this fracture is restored within three decades or more, and sometimes even within two decades, depending on the combinations of virtues and individual constitutions.
de la brisure de la main	concerning the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	And know that the back of the hand is prone to fractures and it rarely happens but frequently shows signs of sprains.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plantar of the hand is fracture or sprain, and if heinomens sois: etreche desormainte a l'onstauxelme, et il ne :ais devises ite, sotimexent, in the paragraph.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	nac:
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the side, it must be that you place a stick above, and another beneath the sole of the foot, so that the hands are upright and straight, then hold him firmly with one hand and securely attach the bandage between the two sides.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not occur in one of these two sides, if it is a wrist injury, then place it with the sole, and hold it firmly; and if you see it on the other side, as in the index or one of the others, then also place it flatly, securely attaching the bandage between them so that it does not move; and if the fracture is elsewhere, either tie all three together in one holding, or put a stick underneeithey; and take care in the treatment and positioning of aposteme, and watch for what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the cracked bone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the fractured is often broken, and it can be seen from both sides when turned forward and backward; and in treatment, it involves two bands placed above and below the break. This translation refers to a method used in medical practice where bandages are strategically positioned around a fracture site for support during healing. The description implies that there are at least two points of attachment: one above the injury (supra-brief) and another below it, providing stability from all angles as the bone mends.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the maladies are pressed down on his face, then extend each minister's bandage equally to its section; and it is when the fracture extends into the bone. This translation speaks about a situation where injuries or complications manifest on the patient's face, which could be related to swelling or other symptoms associated with the injury. The phrase emphasizes that in cases of fractures extending deep into the bone, each supporting bandage must apply equal pressure and distribution across different sections (or parts) to ensure proper immobilization and facilitate healing without causing further damage or discomfort.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the bone, then one bandage should be applied towards the wrist, and the other around the break; also if it is near the knee, either apply a bandage behind it or an extension below it; then place the supports on its two hands so that they are evenly distributed according to their natural position, and then put the splint, and secure them during aposteme, such that no further movement occurs. This translation discusses the steps taken when treating a fracture in locations close to critical joints or limbs like the wrist or knee. It emphasizes careful bandaging around these areas to maintain natural alignment and using supports (splints) with secure fastenings during immobilization, ensuring no further movement that could impede healing.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is aposteme required, it should be allowed to subside first before returning to your work and care; the bandaging is done in part manner. This translation addresses the necessity of allowing any swelling or inflammation (aposteme) resulting from a fracture or medical intervention to diminish before resuming regular activities and continued treatment. It also points out that the approach to applying supportive bandages should be partial, suggesting a balanced strategy rather than an extreme measure, ensuring comfort for the patient while still providing necessary stability during healing.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	En Old French.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if the dislocation occurs, and addresses that which comes to him, as we have said many times; and if he has pieces of bone that are grasped, then he must avoid them, if possible; and if not, it is necessary to cut into the joint, and extract; and treat it as we have said, so long as he is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the chest cracked in such a way that when it is set with pins and plates, as in the shoulder and arm; everything else, even after this restoration, does not change the patient's severe pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	We know that the chest is restored within one year or less than a year, or more than a year, depending on the various differences in constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the wound of the thigh
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	We know that in the wound of the thigh there are few bone fragments, but it often folds many times. And if it breaks, then it is either a fracture or an open wound, and applies to all wounds, and feels well for him.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that it puts back what belongs to its joints, as long as they can be assembled therein; then place the splint, and put on an arched plaster, if you have any knowledge of it, and apply it in such a manner that he must do so for every fracture or other similar injury, whether it is caused by stabbing or other appearance. And address to each accident what belongs to him until he becomes healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	We know that in the leg there are two bones, one is called a "mustel" and the other a "fusil"; and all injuries from this cause come to the arm as well; therefore, the restoration of it is just like that for the shoulder, and the operations involved are also identical.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones in a single fracture line up together, turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is very slightly fractured, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is fractured, it causes great pain and he can see well; then turn him around. But nevertheless straighten out the extension as much as possible, and put it back to its original position, and fix the plasters equally; but however, if the fracture looks ugly, and there are many pieces that make the extension smaller and lighter, adjust according to its nature.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden strips that cover the leg from one side and the other up to the thigh joints, and wrap them over and under each other as if they were a bandage; so it will not allow the leg to bend in either direction, and therefore this is well done; and no one gives him an iron bracelet covering more than half of the leg, and when he has metal, place on the leg to prevent movement, properly made for the injury that occurs there. And move his leg every day to see if it has any stabbing or other accident; and treat as long as he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the thigh.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	Ander li cheveil estes, quant. Leu esquire dure a la maladie d'en-midi de ceu en laxel siens cestant: desvoins ascles le, se faiblezal comentures.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	scape. Whatief.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three years or four pass and the ligament slides, for you will find the bones even, whether fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any bones broken, he should mend them, as we have said about the hand; then make a splint according to the length of each break, and slightly wider than that, and place it over the tablet I mentioned, and bind around it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, brace them, placing a splint for each according to its size, wrapped in one sheet of linen, and tighten the tablet under the head.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And must remember the other things I have said about fractures that we mentioned; and consider each accident according to what it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone on the knuckle
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's natural is broken, if she sit with it expanded, then incline it to the part of her back and hold it by the rear; then fill her belly with cotton as much as one stock; then lift the woman up little and little until the cotton reaches the entrance of her nature, and returns the bone with the stock; and when she feels like urinating, you push the cotton, and from that day on for twenty years or more: if it will be restored, make a bladder of sheep's wool, and tie it to a cork, and pump all the bladder into her nature; then blow air into the cork until the bladder is inflated within her: her nature will restore the broken bone; then fill it with cotton and let it remain for some years, so that she may be healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb or that of a woman is broken, it should be restored as we have described in the bone of the shoulder; and these proximate fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use into practice and understand my book. For the fracture means more than one disposition toward the right path of restoration: therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vein, when it is broken, take an owl's gizzard and put the vein; then wrap it in linen cloth for twenty or more years, and soon he will be sound again.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It must be remembered by the one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hammer or splint, that it may heal now; let those signs testify as we have said.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Lesseins la cest lixel, siix: com'sesque, auccurre thejourneathereau ipsede :lion: "Ivrexante. ousage of aen :little frommeille duxente deleme :agevaxire, :xentainment.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess comes from a wound incising, let the restoration be renewed just now, until the abscess is pacified, and not touched for a whole year or four months, because you would cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken near a joint exposed by dislocation, it requires that you gently and slightly extend your hands.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not assist you in making your hands even, then use this instrument of iron which is .5 or .7 meters long, and its width depends on the extent of the wound; and for this reason it must be measured .3 or .6 meters according to what each time is necessary in any fracture treatment. It should not fold at all under the pressure applied during your work, but rather bent before, and thickened with a small amount of material so that it does not bend when placed on the limb for its purpose.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palanche," because the bones of the limb must be set atop the top part of the visible bone; and once placed, if they move away again, they should clash against each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the manipulation cannot properly grasp the bone, then it requires that you set the top part of the bone so long as your hands have the ability to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back to its place, as we have said before, with an appropriate instrument such as a chisel or screwdriver, in your hope; then realize what is left inside the bone of great hardness and fine cracks.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is brought back and he feels great pain afterwards, so that it shows that it's not in its natural state; if it has been made so long as it is exposed, then moist cloth of linen soaked up one white cloth stiffened plaine. And apply a drapee estrangles de ceukeulx ons escali.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt whether it may not heal in time, just as we have said; and you apply pain to the edge, there is no need to place it on sticks; but wrap it tightly around the edge, with hard cloths and bandages, and similar medicines. And when after a year or two the wound has become worse by swelling, then this indicates that what you have applied over all must be removed, and apply healing ointment to the wounds, just as we have mentioned with various remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is required that you lie the limb for two days, in the morning and evening, until it becomes solid and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is required that the limb be treated in such a way as not to allow the blood to flow irregularly down the lower extremity.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after three days the limb has not joined and it cannot heal properly, then you will see that there are small fragments of bone; because in this case, it is required to treat the wound with bandages (tentative), and remove all these displaced bones so as to prevent further pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess forms at the edge or any other form of infection, it is required to treat it according to what has been discussed earlier. And when a bone breaks within the limb and protrudes into it, like that of the knee or shoulder joint, or similar injuries in large members, you should not attempt treatment; for often many die as a result of intervention too late; however, let it heal until it can bear weight, perhaps after twenty to thirty years. If you are able to treat it within this period, then do so; and if not, leave the wound alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	and those that come about by salt (salt-induced injuries)...
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is close to the joint, and what a pity it is to see the deformity in the limb; and sometimes even then cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	:nappe tape nonesengines: " Thegles tostapart demeansinse desu :surs esle thewesuccle decade:3rdre:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	There is a weak member after dislocation.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone is restored and then dislocated again after its weakened members, due to various reasons: because it was tied too tightly and not as loose as it should be; or because it had too many ties, so that it could not bear weight on the limb; or for a multitude of fractures; or from excessive movements, never in its time; or because there is little flesh in its body, therefore it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to feed the patient with meat and make the bone tender until the swelling diminishes in him; and administer hot baths, giving joy and comfort to the patient; then apply pitch above the limb so that it attracts the great pressure, and the arrow often comes out of water, and returns to its natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Another member is twisted after health.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone breaks open again, and the form of this crooked limb is ugly; neither does it return to its natural course: we do not believe those who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many in our land have done so, which are condemned works. And indeed, where there are nodulations and tortures, they should first be raised with warm water or mallow leaves cooked like fennel fronds, roots, and other things; and then apply a softening medicine made well, as dulcimmal (or honeysuckle) prepared, taking musk gland of ivy-leafed vine, mixed with pork lard or olive oil. Or take figs covered in bran, crush them, and these medicines that alleviate the hardening.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And no bone with nodulation should be rubbed continuously and for an extended period on the wet hands; rather, each hour should have movement alleviated in the limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is old and hardened like stone, as in an arrowhead, it also needs to be struck with iron, covering just the bone, making a subtle incision on the joints lightly; and apply compresses and study the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its natural position, which prevents it from moving freely; and the limb becomes misformed, causing the patient to experience great pain and severe injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When any dislocation occurs, it must now be aimed at restoring feeling in the target area.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Because if it is delayed, the pressure increases in the affected area, and possibly if placed back on its original position when inflamed; yet there is no need to move it again where it has become swollen: many times this leads to discharge and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	generally speaking, when this happens, he should make the crooked limb healthy again; then let it rest until the swelling subsides in him; then raise the member with warm water and oil, and move it gently, and treat each limb as long as any treatment comes to his original position.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I commandments of the great deu : le fiefes d’estur, et il en: les chascune tote ceste qu'encis.
des mandibules	10950 aures des cestitur un :ot : laisses siete tuit 1300 : lexplancture :tale fiele :1207000400'sescription.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	lestruction de crafterifre
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns with many adjustments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and finished, it must be reset promptly, without targeting.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the instrument paints the head of the dislocation, and it thrusts one hand's palm into the root of the jaw dislocation within the mouth if the dislocation is .ij parts; and let the other hand be removed to make them equal; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the instrument ensures equality, until it returns to its original position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is gripped, immediately they are brought together for the .ij mandible segments, heated with hot water and oil until they loosen lightly; do not target the resetting, as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back together evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes smoothly, it is covered with a cloth made from oil roses and wax, then pressed gently over the affected areas.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient lies on his back, with his jaws situated between .ij. spaces, ensuring they do not move to the right or left and do not exert themselves in trying to close them again without difficulty, as long as there are light meals that alleviate pain and tendern Cooking methods:
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	s:centileveneragneigneures.give, le plusseurreuxhoutreinscribe iactechar orfference, tudexanginousteachancellecthecimetiphircure,arretranschevexenthertroitextilevesquexant iaunits.sifere ifccange:l:
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two lower jaws cannot be set back to position within an hour, and are not restored to their original state, then it may lead to feverish and costly convulsions, and possibly diarrhea, and perhaps abdominal distension, and vomiting of colic.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it's a loss; and many have died within seven years.
de la forcelle	from the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot remove anything from the side or back of it and have never been used to extract any thing, and they are strongly felt by him.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the treatment if it is that his severe pain stret Written by: Jocelyn A. Laytner and Tina D. Sellent - University of Maryland Baltimore County
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the wounds near the costume cannot be dislocated; if not, and when it is dislocated at least once, then you place on the stretcher and the bandage, and restrain, and command the patient that they rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in this way we bring back the shoulder joints to their original place when it has been displaced from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	It is said that the shoulder is dislocated for only two reasons: one is when it is dislocated from the arm's side to the shoulder itself; and the other is toward the hip. And sometimes it may be dislocated above, but this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it is not dislocated backwards due to the shoulder, nor in between for the nerves; and many are dislocated downwards towards the arm mostly among those who have little strength, because in these cases it happens suddenly; among those with enough strength, it comes back up by itself into place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to no one with any impact or fracture, and inflates the shoulder by a sudden impulse, and care must be taken that it is not dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is then that you must try it out, as long as you are certain of its effectiveness; and in any case, begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And is known when it goes towards the arm, and distinguishes between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find in their manifest differences.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a cavity, and in front of the arm's center on the shoulder's top, similarly as if it were an egg; and it cannot move its hand to its neck or make any movement whatsoever.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and similarly, if it is dislocated in the upper part, it is not hidden, because you will see it clearly at the top;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this way of dislocation is not merely to pull back when it is new or if there are bad blood vessels involved;
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that they aid the patient's hand above, then put bandages around the arm, and lift the joint upwards at its place; and they help the hand, and stretch it upwards, so if this happens suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	lle astoecreis andes precibe:ingle cece ofsic. Airaire'r aagre, 3ire. Itse:re. Thejaccomestitus arsar (asin aforecte decaisse.   ia.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then dislocate the shoulder bones downwards on his back, and place a layer of even linen there without being too soft or too hard, then put the patient's heel on top of it, and gently move the head of the dislocated shoulder upward, and take hold of the dislocated arm;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And other instruments also move the head of the dislocated arm so that it does not move further downwards; then if you see the shoulder returning in its entirety now, and whether the reduction is done according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And it is that you make the patient present, i.e., a greater man than the dislocated one; and place him facing his side, and raise the linen layer on top of the dislocated shoulder, and lift the linen so that the dislocated arm hangs downwards.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other instruments also pull the arm of the patient downwards towards his belly; and if it is too heavy, do not hold anything with him at all, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the reduction can also be done in another way: and it is that one long stick is placed in the ground, just as a pole, and not too large nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then place the dislocated arm downwards but with a sheet underneinaside it, and the dislocated shoulder is long in length; then extend his hand to another side forming, and the joint returns back to its original position quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return by all these things that we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take a pole of two arms of great length and four spans wide, which has the head shaped to enter between the linen layers on the shoulder, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place the pole on top of the long linen layer underneath it, so that the head does not bruise the dislocated shoulder; and put it over the dislocated arm; extend his arms above the long pole, and attach the sling there, and position the hand at the end of the pole, then place a wide stick under one elbow, and extend the patient's hands downwards, and let his heart hang on the other side: the joint returns to its original location now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in whatever way it may be, you must put linen over the shoulder pad; then place an infusion of powdered mint with frankincense and myrtle under the entire shoulder and chest area, spread over the pad; draw the sling up from the pad to the neck, turn the band around the sling, wrap the patient's hand in his collarbone, and let the hands stay in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he rests for as long as the limbs are comfortable, because they will heal faster; and after four to six weeks or more, move him again, and if he is firm and not tender, then he is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the dislocation is due to moisture or for any other reason, you must treat with three cupping therapy in front of the chiropractor.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do it in such a way that the dislocation, siens ceule: entrer, salle orentree parler lice demeingle mainte partie duin d'abord neufi'sesemeanble toilectre lesmeis. iestime ofrstill leu fromage.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	woman.  100. 0: 6th century andrise ofte thevé (animexentre:sacquer. Theurge asce, sofyse lesse. :i, a laire eture dexure non-bleeds, itin. What, incisa de jourrescales,ume ailletis; cure of theit. ousurette, and itch.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes to the limb in pain, and returns slowly with movement, it uses many times, until the pained part is again natural.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the joint displacement of two parts.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Seeks that the joint displacement is pulled out from its place, and returns to it; and if it is completely separated from all parts, especially in front and behind, and dislocations are not repositioned, because one can see clearly and feel well; and dislocation according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the displaced part with the healthy one, if it can be seen openly. For the joint is stiffened, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it immediately so as to pull up the limb's heel (ankle), for if one pulls up the ankle, it would be grievous to bring it back; and perhaps they cannot be pulled up entirely in any case, especially when it is at the back; and this type of dislocation is worse than others, and sometimes injury comes as a result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be pulled back, that you extend your hand to yours; and his arms are spread out, and his hands according to the dislocation, both above and below, and join the joints together with all of them or at the root of the palm, until they return to their original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand and tightens the root of the displaced joint that has been separated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its original position, apply strong extension; and both ministers extend their arms, so they do not move with the extension; then turn the arm from each side, wrapped in a long and wide cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when he touches the joint to the hand, apply no oil for smoothing the joint; then join the joint again, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is back in its original position, place the arm on an elevated support with a cushion underneath, stretch out the joints, and let the shoulder rest comfortably without any restrictions for some time before letting it go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its original position, let it remain there; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then place the elevated support and the bandage again, and leave it for some time as long as it remains firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	saint toun. ape. Ire d'unfse :istropes fromage. Theursenture dextraise. Theaight. Journeigustarte a:gallandera,lamexent. Forthres. Iture.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	de laissentes. Isolet.aux lecure
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is released, and its return is slight compared to all other joints; it must be brought back to place promptly as soon as it has been displaced, either by stretching it while still out or inserting a stake therein so that the bone may grow.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	The repositioning is effective if you place the affected hand on a table and extend the minister's hands while making them equal in size; then put it such that the palm appears over the appearance of the dislocation, and hold until it relaxes.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Generally, it is necessary to observe whether the hand has returned well; then place the affected side of the hand on a table with extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the affected side of his hand on a table and observe it; when it returns now, that's well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the pulling away of splints calms down the abscesses, then let it resume in this manner.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot endure, and you cannot place it on the table after any day, then the dislocation will remain twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not deny to the patient that as long as their hands are weakened, they cannot stretch anything: therefore you know the nerves or arteries have been cut; if there's no other remedy for it, then stretching near the case with cautery would be one method.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is on the splint we have mentioned, place it there and stretch it; then leave it for a few days, then displace it so that it stays in this position.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no wound in the arm, then apply warm water and rub it so that it becomes sound again.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	ignealice ennurse. In the hand of thèrase xvictiant aoutre:250thent.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never is the head of the shoulder dislocated from any part, never from the back of the hand or abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	And it is the head, and reset the dislocation to your pockets so that it returns, then support the head of the joint, and bring it back to where it has been misplaced.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it rest for two years, then make it stable again; and feed it nourishment as we have said, allow the dislocation to heal over time, let it move, and reattach it.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And in addition to the above, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, do so as you have done before when it is healthy again; and similarly, if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	double dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are several such dislocations, if there is no cure, for it hurts so much that death may be hastened by the malady.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs that it is that evacuations of blood are made without voluntary consent; and he cannot hold them in place, and many times become limp or a pair of hands or two arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times it is dislocated at one-fourth of its length; the part that moves backward, in such cases, is called "gilboisite."
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The cure, if it is that the 'gilboisite' came from childhood; but if there was no treatment or healing in its entirety.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which falls down or is subjected to impacts or similar occurrences, the old ways of curing by great words do not bring much benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have attempted it according to my intention, and formed various exercises in different ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the 'gilboisite' there is neither cure nor healing when it comes before.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also this one that comes directly next to two points, and cannot be healed from the wounds it causes except for those that come straight to the back, as I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the painful ones extend over his face in one line even and have strain on themselves within, so they do not break.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then make a firebrand at the head of the wound in shape on earth and another for the fingers, and tie some straw between the slits under the painful joints, and others for thighs, legs, ankles, and kneecaps.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And also divide them into the straws, one to the head and the others to the fingers among these two firebrands.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And they should be well closed, the firebrand as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the spinal joints until it relaxes.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not improve with this cure, take a bed of three arms long and close around the part where there is pain, and place the worm on that side, and put the head of the firebrand underneayer near the spinal joint, then put the middle of the bed under the spinal joint.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And place the doctor's fingers on the other head of the bed, and press well until it relaxes at its base; if you see him turning the worm by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you make two firebrands at the painful joint of one arm and two others for the fingers, placing between each firebrand a palm's width apart.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each firebrand there is one hole or where the worm turns, and they are firmly embedded in the ground so that they do not move; between each pair of firebrands there should be another firebrand turning, so that it helps the turning of the holes, and with .ij. small firebrands about a palm's width apart to turn the worm.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the line that is among the slits to one of the worm's turning points and another line to the other turning point for the fingers, so that each minister turns his wheel at all parts of the joint, and the master places the spinal joint evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is evened out, place on the disinfecting board a lot of ointment and then firewoods, and then a tablet made of three arms long that shines the back of the gilbert's joint and the part of the spinal bone sound, and tie them with one line as we have said, and use the painful ones in subtle grumbling until they are healthy.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if nothing happens at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer soft and soothing medicines with the same tablet that we have mentioned before; and nevertheless I administer a piece of linen.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And there is no appearance in the back part of the spine of the back, and you must take care that it be dislocations; and for sure this bone comes out, so there should not be any assumption: perhaps death would come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hernia.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	" The following passage ail veintaine :istanx :iij.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	. Theod:13rdrague vei0scape. What'llenjour theater ofrement (from:cause :x:thorse, sofaire :ge (not (in.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	dise:saw:nurgimesubmer:sainticule it (the following.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those who suffer this injury, it is that these accidents are contrary to them.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who suffer this injury, it is that their leg appears well in relation to the completion; however, it does not double the groin sensation of pain, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so beforehand, and retain urine, and inflame the angina, and when they move, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who suffer this injury, it is that they cannot expand their groin, nor double, and that leg is more crushed than the other, and the angina becomes milder, and are the kneecaps at the edge between the thighs below the waist.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this kind of dislocation is that it has been previously occurring, and it takes time according to its arrangement, without any solution; and it does not require one to have suspicion.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in cases of fresh dislocation, it is three types of dislocations, and if you hasten to return the joint, you will keep it together and outwards, and the movement goes to both sides; perhaps it may come back on its own, and there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not come back in this manner, it is required that you appoint one strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands or with some bandage placed above the groin;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other ministers stretch his hand down in a manner that he pushes his hands on the soles of his feet, then he wraps one strong bandage above the kneecap; and another holds the head of the joint.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they extend upwards and downwards them all once, as long as the patient remains upright on the ground for one time, and then continue hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to three types of dislocations, and if the dislocation has come back as we have said, it is well done.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If that is not the case, then it requires a cure according to its appearance. When the dislocation is at the side of the thigh, it is required to support the patient on their healthy leg and place the bandage below the root of the knee, and around the heel which is between the calf and the angina, then have the bandage in front of the angina and towards the force.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and another ministers wrap his arms around the large calf of the affected knee, and extends it backwards in shape like this: if it returns to its original position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter compared to others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot compress it in the way we have said, then it is required to tie the two affected feet together with a strong bandage under both heels and around the knees, and make the injured leg extended by more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then hang them from the top of a beam or two arms long; and command one minister to wrap around the calf of the kneecap of the injured leg, and other ministers are hanging with the same, as the dislocation is coming back soon now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is on the legs, et au defour seize jonge tiarre de ceu enltres que les bons jours. Et sienses: Caule in aurellis, etimes du malaide lou cetera espace of ounces vouldes leu.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	sake:age aces fromages of the. I'sace.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And it is planted with wet linen around the wound, so that the patient does not bleed out the malady; and then stretches each limb towards him, and the doctor places the dislocation in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If she returns it's good. But if not, put it on the table and press it as we have said in the context of gingivitis, and apply the painful area to the patient's healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front of it, it must be quickly extend the injured leg according to what I have said; and place the doctor's pain on top of the malady, then press with the other hand, and hold down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is downward, it does not need to extend the malady downwards or lift up from the ground, but rather as we have said about the lying position on the thighs;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and whether in his face, and the line extended as we have said before, and it must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and when the malady extends his legs so they are equal; then adjust the kneecaps, and place the plaster, and wrap the bandage around it so that he does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and if he rests for two or three years, then move him, and place the plaster on it; and if you see that they are equal, continue the same as before, and let him stay for three more years; then release him to walk well until his limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	about the dislocation of both knees
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The genitals are evacuated in three ways according to which we have said: namely upwards and downwards, and backward; and do not vacate them forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the malady to bend his leg at the kneecap, and if it does not bend at the kneecap, you know that it is evacuated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the recovery of all it is that you make the malady sit down, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his kneecap, and put the patient's feet under yours.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his genitals in your palms, and interlock your fingers, then bend the two sides of the groin area formed; and another attendant extends the patient's thigh so that the genitals return to their place, and you sign that he moves his leg easily.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on it, and raise the leg to the kneecap, and bind them tightly for three or four years, then release him; and he does not need to walk again until his limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs do not improve, then strong extension is applied as we have said in the treatment of hemorrhoids, so long as he remains healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	about the dislocation of both ankles
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The toes are sometimes extended, and they are completely evacuated upwards and downwards.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs that show that the ankle is loose in front of the part where it has been evacuated completely:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The dislocation is quick, and it must be stretched quickly with his hands when he falls abruptly only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from both sides, it must be set so the patient lies with the right side and uses only his legs above the ankle as aids.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then take the patient by his right hand, and then again by his left, twice put him in an upright position, and let the patient stand up with ease.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this twice more as we have said, when lifting and moving the patient's body; if it returns to its place, that is well; but if not, then start over again, because it does return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on earth, and firmly place a wax pellet between his knees, and cover him with bedclothes so that he does not injure himself.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then you should burn the patient's chest, and some other assistants stretch the stone to his hands or to one of them, which they place on top of the headstone;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each assistant stretches equally, and the rope should be there between the patient's chests to hold the patient when they are in it.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the resetting at his hands, and some other assistants burn the healthy leg above the bed, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, if they put on the plaster and cover with bandages, and tie up their leg, and place the stone on the thigh, and warn those nerves under the ankle not to be too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it be for two or three years, and if the strain occurs; then they loosen it after one year or a quarter, and do so that the patient will recover from this dislocation in four years;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes beyond this end, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a cut arises at the foot, it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals completely.
des dois	And from this (the implication here might be about the necessity of some action following treatment).
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the dislocations are dislocated, they must be extended very slowly with work, and it is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in no place on either side of the headstone, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright on one flat surface or on a straight table, and put your stone over where these joints appear, then press firmly on the stone until he returns to normal.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is equalized and there is nothing more to be done, then make the patient lie on a flat table with two chairs, stretch his leg, leave it for three years, loosen it again, and let him rest until he is completely healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is intended to restore it, there are many times that the patient's pain becomes unbearable.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you do not know this art well and you have been gentle with it and you are not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And use at the beginning of soothing measures incisions to control it, and let the patient keep the shoulder in their hand if there is no hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see any hope, now reset the limb to its original position so that the incisions do not enlarge.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in its original position, now apply soothing measures and treat the wound as it requires, drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, and move the bones and do as we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And do not enter into fear, as I have said, for it is in your best interest according to your Creator, and because of the wisdom given you by your God. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The physical meaning refers to the medical practice concerning bone dislocation, treatment, and recovery within medieval times' context.
