O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and together with its fulfillment through explanations and statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I have completed this work with this treatise, which is part of the book of surgery, namely "cirurgie".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is well known in our region and is widespread everywhere, if it perishes, there will be no one left to practice it, and let us not delay the wounds that little old descriptions found in ancient books written by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the error and pride, understanding is closed, and knowledge is separated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or I think that I will revive this treatise in its entirety according to the path of explanation and announcement, and bringing together the forms of fire cautery instruments, and other tools from the work with the alignment of the declaration and preparation as it is proper.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for someone to meddle in the science of anatomy as Galiens says, so long as he knows the judgment of bones, and their forms and joints and separations, and knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of limbs, and movement and resting, and its origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And as Ipocras says that it is not much with the work of hands and in this field particularly.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that who is not familiar with what has been said before, he will get into error and hurt people; I have often seen many such as are meddlers in this science who abandon it and its sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who inflicted an abscess on the neck or groin of a woman and cut her arteries there, because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who betrayed a large stone from the belly of a man, and he took with him a piece of the bladder, and was killed therein three years later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	ouns esprit desuet ayevein thees: "eaux leu lait, euexamitejournele it'soldescripture oferre. Whatgloat esse ateirol:wok:meatloire. Whaten'air fromage.autein:fromentire.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another physician who treated a duke of our land, who had his leg broken, and with the break he got an open wound; and the doctor's ignorance forbade him from setting the fracture on top of the wound using strong linen, and left no chance for salve in the wound, and then commanded not to loosen it anymore; and he waited until the leg was completely healed and the knee joint came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come to him, and hurriedly came to unbind the leg; and when I saw that I had unbound it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all avenues of correction had already been exhausted or the limbs were involved, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb as long as the limb was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there was another physician who collapsed the abscess and then inflamed it due to the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is pure in its melancholic state, there is no need for touching with iron if it is not partly open; otherwise, one cannot entirely eliminate what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	Therefore, dissecting the body's parts, you must understand that works of hands are divided into three categories: in other words, there is danger in various positions; and I will show in each page of this book where it has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For the reason you must guard yourself so that the foolish physician does not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons and engage in your most painful and resolute manner, and use the better way so that with the grace of God you shall be saved; and let diseases spreading from you. And let nothing make doubt in this world to glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	llastreveslustelocched 13reveuledifrevelvaillexseurone.rescarter:nature 	ntiages in l'anglancleur (Romansisuelailles ifsange to letieu,ifles lekuncrewache ices
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to .iiij. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire and medical cauteries, and these chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of traction, and instruments for performing cauterizations, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about dissection and cutting, and suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered with the forms of traction.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about treating dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, as well as forms of traction.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So, with our memories of the work, it is necessary that I state the quality of the aid and the harm caused by each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid and harm is the longest and most subtle science and secret replies; and to this topic spoke several physicians, and they agreed on it; and please them little with their words, as fearing lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery assists universally in all conditions where there is matter, for example, two conditions: hot condition with material and dry condition with material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry combined condition of matter, no one came to an agreement, and they said that cautery is great help; while others said otherwise, that cautery is only helpful for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be a treatment for heat-related diseases caused by heat or dryness; and those who said otherwise claimed that cautery does great help in treating heat and dry disease that comes from within humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the shape of the body and its moisture to the hot condition, you change the shape.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it many times through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, no one dares to contradict those who have tried it and know the master of cauteries, and the diversity of human conditions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the remedies and spaces of ten days; but we fear for cold and moist conditions.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the wise ones gathered together and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And you should know, my child, that a fire cautery is full of medical secrets and more mercy than the hot cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it does not come from wounds but only to the member that is cooked, and it does not harm other members if named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The hot cauteries come from members other than the one treated, and bring diseases of serious discharge to the affected member; and by accident they cause the disease.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire by its highness and mercy of its substance does not do such things, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it was above the verdant fields of things; and because of this long duration of speech, I apologize for it, as I do not like to spare you the secret that is returned or by fire, and the quality of the work, how it relieves diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstration; so take it into consideration.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And you should know, child, that they agreed on the time when fire cauterizations must be performed and exempted themselves from it.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that fire cauterization is suitable in all times, because the nuisances suffered by it are aided by the use of the cautery; and primarily if the cauteries are for necessary wounds that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the member due to delaying treatment.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And you never think, my child, as the wise men do; for to a disease cured by fire cautery there is no return; and they say so; but it is not like they claim, because fire cauteries are not medicine that changes the constitution, and dries out the humors which cause pain, and they are valued more than medicine used for speeding up its value and virtue.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is said that the disease grows again according to the constitution of the malady and its body, and the virtue of the illness and its appearance; they are assembled in him with superfluities through acquiring foods and other things, unless cauteries were administered therein or it had little excess and moisture, as fire cauteries for pain, and similar things, and no such pain returns again; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not call fire cauteries the backbones of medical treatment, and this is to see; they believe it doesn't compare with other treatments in any disease, but their understanding is false, and we apply fire cauteries as a means of treatment for no illnesses and it is worthwhile.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	20e quatorne :esme laissu envoiur les pense durement cautere la letres: "Bé: "srele "Iesla testes of itoncles acoin "C: Theuccessor " :erence.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old say that gold instruments are healing tools compared to iron ones, and they did not mention harmful effects but only the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they said the hairs from cautery do not fall off, but it is just a sight since I have tried it myself, and I found that in some people.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And as for heating gold instruments, you do not know how much it is affected by the color of gold, and if it suddenly cools off at once; and if you heat it too much, they become like fire; and therefore there are enough difficulties involved.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery because it has made our work more effective in the past.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter to be organized around these main points, so that the content becomes easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The use of open caustic instrument (cauterization) is discussed in this context.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are valuable both for their thermal and cooling effects on the brain, and due to various causes such as severe headaches ("soda"), numerous bodily fluids affecting important areas like the head, ears, and a multitude of dreams and chest pains, mainly maladies originating from cold so-called "frostbite," paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that it expels the maladies with a medicinal solution which resolves the chief (head) by removing either III nuisances or III, depending on whether the virtue and power of the instrument allow the patient to endure; and then restores the chief again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then it is suitable to place between your hands, and put your fingers on the body part; after that you insert the palm' Written by Dr. David M. Schleicher for The Counterpoint, a publication of the Foundation for Economic Education (FEE). Read the original article here.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it sets on the skin with ink, and then draws down and pulls out your hand little by little dislocating; then lightly lift your hand, and reward the skin so that you see the bone .i. small piece; and if you do not see it, then repeat cautery until you see the bone as I have said; afterwards take a little silk, and put in moistened cotton inside, and place on the skin, and let it stay for three years; afterwards cure the tetrapharmacy wound which is called "tetrapharmacy", so that it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said the old man that as long as more water is poured on the wound, it will purify itself; and for this reason it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that you must leave the cautery so long until a part of the bone is broken off, and then treat that which has been broken from the bone, and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other says that you must leave the cautery so much until it is as wide as .i. button which women put in their shoes for it to draw out fluids because of this reason, and therefore you should pour water over the wound long enough; afterward, you must heal it well.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me entirely good in every aspect; there are none that cause fear in anyone' Cookies are a popular snack among people of all ages. Explain the health implications of consuming cookies frequently, and suggest ways to enjoy them as part of a balanced diet without overindulging.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	The phrase appears to be fragmented and lacks context, possibly referring to the pain in one's mouth:
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	sainct laisse sié queles l'it'santillement:es : 'nature. Iting : 136000000.comme itérits :1èrele. Ifraising of thean05eux. ITEMostre (a lesiure, aspeak4 himana andclaus :1200escrivente. It'wisere: 13rdentice.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Beware that the shoulder joint of the patient is naturally strong, and it should not be too cold; however, let us cauter around there a little as we have previously mentioned.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making cautery on each horn bone just at the bone, as we have previously mentioned, and do one cauterizing around it called "vassels"; and place your hand so you don't see the bone directly: in these cases, the patient feels too much greater pain than others, and I will speak about them later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those used for most of the head's core, and this form is:
dou cautere dou chief	at the core or center of the bone
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there is sudden pain in the central part of the bone and the illness extends to the oil (blood), and the joints are cleansed with universal medicines, and all other treatments mentioned for dividing diseases have not been effective; however, one should cauterize according to two methods, which is medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of fire and medicine, when prepared as a decoction (a method of boiling or steeping herbs to extract medicinal properties), it takes two applications on the respective joints; then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can restore the decoction under the skin; and if it is restored well, it leaves for about thirty-one hours. Then unbind and treat with fire sticks the restoration area until now .ij. years or .iij.; then place on cotton balls soaked in wax as much as needed to cover the healed area.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cauterization has been done and if you see that it is healed, and if there are any of those burned medicines or treatments I have written about or used in burning medicines;
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron caution (cauterization) is done thus. Lighten the heating iron of this kind;
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because the head is shaped like a clove or has only a little curvature, and in appearance seems small; and place on the painful spot and touch with your hand, and move slightly forward, so that the edge of the spine's skin bears more weight, and let your hand prevent the artery from burning, as it moves further away.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After applying cotton to the wound and placing it on the spot for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in tallow, and then treat the ulcer until it heals completely; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the "cultellare" cautery at all points of its tip, be careful not to cover the artery within this migraine that is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing an ulcer as we have described in the divisions of diseases and it doesn't improve, it is required that you heat the "cultellare" cautery until it becomes white; then draw a line across half a dozen fingers on the remaining wound area, hold your hand once, and stretch so that the artery is not covered in this healing process, and also warn of the mandible which remains mute when moved, and the nerves do not have any regard for malady or spasm, and warn to let the blood flow from the artery as it becomes coagulated, or coagulation occurs, immediately especially with concern to whom we know nothing about and who is not a student or practitioner; but I will tell you how to handle residual sanguineous fluid in this section of the book, and show you where on the wound it appears as noted.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease and the sufferings are present, then cauterize it again as we have said in our teachings, and treat the wound until it is healed; and when you see, administer with the cautery we have mentioned or with the one used for extracting the artery, using two knives; and these cauteries are better than any other and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in one ear, colder
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear comes with pain of frost and it has been provided with remedies and other treatments that we have mentioned in our division of diseases, for these pains do not cease, thus heat this "pouin" cautery as follows; from which form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing both ears, and if the pain is in each earlobe: and at .xxiii. car ongein of allum deffortes les sejourrede l'orse eaicte cele perefice :entrail des fois il estamee.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that must be treated with cautery is only those which move by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and it should not make use of cauteries from wounds or exudates of blood clots.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torture that moves by phlegm and expectorations from the head and gargling, and it then requires that you cauterize with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance forward on the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips; and place the cautery where the area is open, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above a slight distance from the horn' pivot point, and another in the temple similarly distant; let the cautery remain as long as the moisture bursts out; and that is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the cutter-like shape that we have shown you before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing it, as I have previously mentioned, provided it remains sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, and there is no profit, the patient does not have fever, yet he performs three cauterizations: two on each horn pivot point of the skull, one pushing back the head (as described previously), and another called "vasselz" under which the mouth-stomach area is covered; and you must treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	Of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This kind of disease requires giving the patient large years and mercury-based pills to treat the brain; afterwards, he removes the headpiece of the affected person, and places it on the occiput's emplastre (a piece of metal used for treating wounds) made of cinnabar or sulfur which is described in the texts about bandages. And that is how you perform this type of cautery: as I have said before.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is so then healthy, good; and if not, he will do. And for each one of them, two strikes are made downwards from the top of his head to an interval of one finger between each strike, and with a large piece of iron .two pieces of wood; and treat him as they treat others, and if you see fit, and the patient suffers much, then he will do for one hundred blows in moderation; and if necessary, another two strikes on the horns, and treat it until healthy; and whichever cautery is called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of cold steel chief
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the chief be seasoned by years and everything we have said before; then he strikes down the patient's head twice, once on each horn, and one behind it and three above the spine of the neck; and if you have more skill, and the corpse is moist and the patient suffers much, and the illness is severe, so strike him with four blows under the spine of the back; then leave him until he becomes a skilled physician, and care for your hand; afterward treat him until he is healthy, and the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	This term translates directly from French to English as "epilepsy." In historical context, it would refer to an illness characterized by recurrent seizures, which may have been treated with cauterization techniques according to medieval medical practices. However, in the absence of further text or specific references, we can only provide this direct translation without interpretation or additional explanation.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics must use sharp cauteries only for those who are asthmatic, and it is required to first season the brain with years of experience and other treatments that we have mentioned in relation to how long the patient suffers greatly from severe pain when medication is not effective. This part of a hypothetical medical text might describe a specific treatment protocol for epilepsy during medieval times, where it's suggested only certain conditions (in this case asthma) might warrant cauterization and emphasizes the importance of experience in managing such severe cases.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer much, then he will perform gargling and chewing to season the brain sometimes with bones or meat; after that he strikes down the chief in moderation, and makes one cautery according to what we have said before, and one on the back of the shoulder, and one on each horn; and if the patient suffers greatly and is suffering, then he will perform cauteries as I have described for someone who has paralysis and stiffness of limbs, on the spine's backbone and neck, and that specific cautery which we call "olivier" in accordance with how I have said before. This hypothetical extract might describe a treatment regimen designed to alleviate severe symptoms of infantile paralysis (also known as polio) during the medieval period using various methods including gargling, chewing bones or meat for supposed therapeutic effects, and cauterization techniques.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant suffering from epilepsy, then he will perform one gentle cautery in this manner: ...
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	Liere: .iij. In thexentorce leu, eau feces deschiface dite deffa de ceufin theursse toise ices etiquel estilej'sesurge. Theovine frommeaux ofice jecti incesioure (Johns.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluity declines towards melancholy, and his overly moist skin is twisted by reason of melancholy, then it is good for him to drink something so that his brain be purified, according to what he has before in this division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the malady; after making .i. wick (made of lin well crafted, like a circle, and placing it around the head); and the patient's hair curls are gathered together tightly from all sides; after this preparation, using burnt goat skin for the fire; and light the fire immediately so that he can endure it on his wick; then remove the circle in parts around the head, and let it cool down; and do this once every week with another suitable treatment until he becomes healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you see to cauterize the patient, by making points in several places on the cautery. This method softens the brain significantly; and then apply cotton wool dipped in mutton fat and grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hairs
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs we have mentioned in this section appear first, then it begins and drinking something purifying for the head is done to the patient; also keeping his skin from all dampness, and making him sweat or take baths several times without food.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands the chief to turn it around, and does cautery inside the chief's head, and makes two cauteries on either side of his temples where they meet; then throughout the whole cauterization every vein and artery that are under the skin should be touched with this or that cautery according to their distance from the temple, and he must instruct them to let blood flow freely, and if you see too much blood coming out, you should cut it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to squeeze out the veins and make an incision as necessary so that blood can be drawn from them; and never once do we perform a cautery or cuts in the back of these two bones.
dou cors des larmes	double joint of tears (likely referring to a part of the anatomy associated with crying)
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	oldre an chascune voie depres de lou chief.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Two corners of tears coming out from between the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you give the medicine as we have mentioned in this section, and it does not benefit at all, however, after treating the head of the patient, and he performs a hot fire cupping on the scalp (using four small cups), and then he makes two more cuppings called "clavicles" under each shoulder blade; and warn him about the artery that you must not touch.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cupping known as "clavicles":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	If the paper of this oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the hot fire cupping known as "olivare" should be performed; since it has this form.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you make the two cuppings under each shoulder blade as well as on the shoulders themselves (which are also called "sorcilz" or shoulders); and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to what I have said before.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Two hairs which are pointing towards the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never happens that the hairs of the oils are converted into particles or dust, and they do not touch the oil, and so it is done according to two methods: namely by fire, or with hot medicine (as in cupping therapy).
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the fire cupping instructs the patient to let the hairs remain long and straight until they fall out naturally; and if they are touched at their roots, he restrains them so that they do not move while they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are growing hairs, and he puts the patient's face on paper. And then place a sign of the hairs near the hair; and then put cotton wool in acair. And it is done of fire cups of quarters depeccre douce caucer les poilz liens, et desu eveit en la lice as en iaun:esme laisse, seigneurs en leve aliteralte thexer the papiers.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	ller afin of theent. What:lustrelastesque deffles toit, and itte theirse, жаiase fromat:sionning from the,cummericexacteccure.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come back and the paper is softened again, then perform the cautery on that spot myself, as you have done first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper has been raised to its natural position, and become evened, and do not pinch the hairs with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot medical cauterization you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment leaf shape of myrtle; take French soap and fresh lime, one of each .Z., and grind them together well; do it hastily so that they don't cool down, then sprinkle it over the shape made with the myrtle leaf on the paper you have prepared; and if the illness is only in one oil, then work on it accordingly, and also both of them; and put cotton wool moistened with clean water under each eyelid; and let the malady be at your sanity, showing your demonstration there, pressing a few times when the patient feels irritation from the medicine, as they feel too like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have done that for a long time, let the medicine take effect on your duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the irritation is no longer present, lift the paper also as if it were lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, that is well done. If this not, then reapply medication on the spot or the medicine has not been applied yet, as long as your actions remain evened out, and your eyes are properly set; then place cotton wool moistened with soft cloth until the redness of ointment (diacnes) subsides, after which you treat the affected area that is called "diaphoresis" and other similar conditions, so long as it remains healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you have learned that you must take great care not to spill the medicine on your eyes; and if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs stick in the oil, then resume the treatment on the spot where the paper is softened from the medicinal paste as you did before; afterwards treat until it remains healthy. This translation conveys guidance for post-application of medicine following cauterization—stressing the importance of not allowing any spillage onto the eyes, and the steps to take if there's a need to reapply treatment in areas where the medicinal paste has softened the paper used as a barrier.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And you know that men's stature varies greatly in height and smallness, and according to this, no longer the straight way is returned to him who studies such an art. In essence, this fragment emphasizes the individual variability among patients when it comes to treatment outcomes based on their size (height) or condition (smallness), suggesting that medical practitioners must adapt their methods rather than follow a uniform approach for everyone.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	And of the care with fire in ulceration by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you heal a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary for you to perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your health; and dress their hair between your hands so it does not move or shake, afterwards apply moistened cotton or infused olive oil on its top; then cauterize it partially: if the chief looks like a bird's quill, assemble the cautery there; if you see any point from one to another head, and if you see them as well as beams between heads, but everything that is done in this way holds value for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open and removing its residue, and drying it; and if it is closed, perform the operation and make holes in it; afterwards place a hot caustic there, and hold your hand at the part underneath the oil where your hand does not cause any foolishness; then apply the caustic to the oil's fat, and corrode it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If at the beginning you use the caustic on the bone, it would be better. If not, then repeat the caustic once more if you are experienced in doing so, and let it rest for 2 years; afterwards apply moistened cotton in burlap, and treat with dry excoriation until it heals, and after 40 days when the bone is exposed, use corrosive medicine accordingly as described by your mentor.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a method of treating a fistula that none of the ancient doctors have mentioned. Firstly, open the fistula and create an opening in it; afterwards place a thin silver coin (caiman) underne mantle where its shape lies.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make the quantity of about .з. (approximately 0.3 to 0.4 grams) of powder; then hold your hand or caiman firmly so that it does not move, as the molten lead does not mix with its oil; it is necessary for you to place the powder-moistened cotton in an ointment jar filled with beeswax or infused olive oil. The lead will shape the head of the fistula, and this method ensures a mercilessly healthy sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the caustic we have described, it is beneficial. But if not, then it must be administered to the bone marrow, and return the fistula to the core of the bone according to what should be done in one's own right.
des crevaices en levres	or cracks on the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	There have been many "cracks" on the lips that are called "poils," and mainly on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you heal these "cracks" as we have described in the divisions of diseases and this treatment does not yield results, then it is necessary to use a small circumferential caustic according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on those cracks as they are formed; after the bone heel in his sanity:
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the incision on the abdomen
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess originates from the root of the stomach or in the uvea, or in the roots of the teeth, after it has formed pus and ridden out and become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, but there is no gain: nevertheless, it must be that you use .i. fire cupping according to the amount of the fistula; afterwards apply your hand around the base of the fistula, and on its lower side; and do this once or twice after curing what we have said in treatments, until he is sound again; and if so, it is good; and if not, you must discover the root and remove the decomposed bone according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Movement of teeth roots
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth roots move, you treat them with medicine which is not effective; then place the head of the mallet on your healthy tooth immediately after using cautery that forms a vein in part as you apply a cloth over the tooth. Hold it hot quickly with your hand while feeling the heat emanating from the root, and remove your hand allowing the patient to feel the warmth coming from the tooth's root; then release the cautery and reapply it according to your desire; afterwards fill the mallet with saliva, seal its mouth for an hour and healing fistulas.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part the moving teeth root is confirmed, and the restricted gums are softened by decomposed moisture.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain in teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain in teeth arises due to cold or fever, and treatments with medicine are not effective; therefore it is necessary to use cupping according to different techniques: and cupping with wax and cupping with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cupping with wax if you desire such as of various types; after placing cotton and wrapping a tent over the pointed tip of it, and smearing burnt beeswax on the painful tooth instantly and hold tightly until he cools down; and do this often enough for the virtues reach the root of that tooth, and if you see melted wax with cotton in the next tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	e caure taille.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do fire cautery on the head that you wish, and according to what you can do; and it is the shape of a cone.
des scrophules	Sores (Scrofula)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrophula are of slime and cold moistures, not responsive to medicines, first scrape the head with fire in this way afterwards there will be two openings for the fumes to escape from; then place the cautery under the abscess once or twice as much, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small enough, apply cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, leaving it for three years; afterwards cover with cotton soaked in woolen cloth until the exudation stops, then treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture overtakes the channels of blood and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be treated with solvent medicines; afterward perform fire cauterization at the root of the throat, making sure to keep it away from the neck but also not too hot. Then do another cauterization at the joint between the collarbone and the spine's head, which we call "clavicle," in the form shown before; treat the wound as previously described until it heals.
de la toust	Of draught (Of a draft or aspiration)
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	All diseases of the channels are cold moistures, and this disease does not have fever or chills, being an old illness; therefore make two burnings in the same channel according to its former shape; then perform another cauterization between the nipples; and carry out a cauterization called "clavicle" based on the previously described form.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, perform two burnings in the entire "punctures" according to their shape shown here; and these points should be placed just above or below .xxx.; after treating the wound as described beforehand, carry out a cauterization called "poinches" for about three times based on this form.
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter, that's why you do three of them in the same place.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced; therefore you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After applying a soothing medication on the patient's back and side; then apply heat in the area between two small bumps with your left hand; if the joint is dislocated within those areas, scrape the cautery that has .ij. notches according to its shape shown here.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	Androctur keuture: desir leu en cauenture douceur deitur les cuisinour keurture, et queil lapeurs. aundes queirre : Lepremeredre, etiquet. The Frenchmeilleur cautere aoutre lexitur. Whatsofyssire outrolet mekils andre thekes.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And there is never any alignment on this.i. nerve for which it has seven cautions.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying heat with a wire on the wound; after allowing the patient to rest, and not exerting their limbs too much for long periods until they are well-reassured.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens; however, making a caustic with thick cautery on the clavicle bone, or applying many burns while pressing it. Because the joint connection is directed towards the marrow and is healthy in the patient's maladies.
dou cautere de pleuresin	double cautery for bleeding
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient doctors said one should perform bloodletting with the roots of aristolochia (also known as Dutchman's pipe), and in this manner: take one root that is the longest you can find, dry it or boil it to make it large and long; coat the wound in oil, and heat it up, then cauterize .i. caustic between the hand and the forearm with .ij. small cauldrons (.ij. are two), and .ij. caustics slightly descending into the area below the beard; and .ij. caustics between the fifth rib and the sixth costal cartilage, declining a bit backward; and .i. caustic on the navel, and .i. other one on the stomach, and .ij. caustics between .ij. costals (ribs) that are far apart from each other; and do not press too hard with your hand but rather open it as much as in odorizing plants.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And the ancient doctors said that no one used fire caustic as if to a barber (razor), and they scourged and put it between the ribs until it reaches the apoplectic state; and leaps in his pain, just as we have mentioned in the case of the liver. But in this work there is fear or that patients die immediately from these maladies, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of a mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the divisions in healing methods, and it does not benefit at all; rather, they apply three good caustic methods that everyone agrees on.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	ce.iij. Celtre. Ceintendans les peice cetera:laterre cestime theodre despres itaconjour, l’antere. Ijacces'sisle, ilteinste andante duetting aicare fromercismejulieting presse ofich:olden.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way to perform cautery is by heating the instrument with two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and holding the place where the movement occurs, or if the arrow enters from the right side, and raising accordingly the place according to the position of the arrow, according to the length of the limb, and the cautery be performed according to the width of the limb.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After heating the two prongs until they are perceived on the other side, and then pierce them with cautery, and so you will have three; if you see it, if you cauterize all of the instrument to three points. Then after the treatment when it has taken prolonged fever, this is what happens that it differs from the previous treatments mentioned.
de ydropisie	of jaundice
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not useful for jaundice, but rather in the excited state of "asclytes," as we have previously described in our divisions. When you perform the treatments according to these methods and there is no benefit from them, it requires that you make three cauteries under the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the muscles, two behind the spine along the vertebrae, and one near the pelvis; and place the cauterization well close to the level of the joint.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery over for days to allow prolonged fever to pass, and not abandoning the treatment of the malady after cauterization; and healing would occur, and all these points would be united with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery used for the abdomen is a clavicle that we have previously shown (before); and that one for the back is oviform, according to what it has been placed before us.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflamed joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen due to jaundice and covered with white copper (citrinum), it requires that you perform cauterization on the back between the little finger and ring finger; and hold your hand with the cautery rotating. And do not enter too deeply, so as not to create more white copper deposits therein, but rather apply the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing the cauteries on both legs one of each leg (the other; and let it be curated longesque done de laissames esurant: .iij. Cautere, et parler: iiij.
de la menoison	of the medicine
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	The solution of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as its retentive and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines become obstructed, and it cannot be treated by any methods; and you see the patient very suffering with great vitality, so I will. i) give a strong cautery to the stomach according to what he has said before or on fire cautery of the stomach, at which circulation occurs; and ii) four cauteries subtly in the belly, and iij. cauteries under the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, he makes fire cautery to the groin, and I) one cautery on each thigh, and iiij. small cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of haemorrhages
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When haemorrhages are the foundation or one or more of them, and they are ancient and large humors that are cold and moistly corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in sections, but it does not profit unless you make: III) three cauteries on the spine behind the back, those which are farthayer from each other along the vertebrae and pierce repeatedly; I) one cautery under the belly. II) two of them.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think his stomach is cooling down and the meat does not cook, and it swells in the face, for then the great cautery on the stomach as before has been said, and I) another on the liver, and I) another under all the caustic palate; and let the fire burn over a long time. Afterward treat the wound so that it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cholestericity which is named "thelul" (This appears to be an incorrect reference in Old French as there's no historical term called "thelul". However, a possible relevant translation might relate to 'cholestery', referring to conditions related to gallstones or bile issues.)
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat with cholestery (presumed correction for "thelul"), if the cautery that seems like a razor is applied all over it where there is cholestery, and let your hand be as long so the cauteries weaken at the birth of the vein, for he will not cut; do this once or twice or .ij. times, and if there is much cholestery, then cauterize each one in such a way that we have said; afterwards treat with ointments until they are cured; and if you cauterize greatly on the cataract, he will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	about disease. And if it comes from cold and dampness, leather of bloodscafful; etec. It may not be injurismenest saufil desengel in Old French text: les plimesmens. Il estandes. Leu deffacute caustice: ephile develoft oulden en la finsextra, anda :12. OUll thecture francekonsulthele mevepreymentreli'sinsule oftext. Theurfaire, tocet anatomes of thefeinan.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the strong ones cannot bear cutting or sewing, which we will tell them in their own language, comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If there is no fistula, and it is old and full of clots and moisture-corrupted deposits, if you must treat it with great delicacy, and be aware how much the tissue has been penetrated; after using a scalpel that seems like a second rasp, and inserting the scalpel into the fistula according to the amount of tissue that has entered, and repeat the cauterization as long as the deposits and corruption are present, one time or two times or three times depending on the need; then warn you against burning nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, warn them of these vessels, and do not make such holes in the abdomen hastily, and think that it is not permanent; after curing as long as necessary until they are healed, and if the tissues are ossified for a distance, then you know that the fistula is completely healed; and if the materials are bone fragments, and corrupt the bone at the bottom; then in such cases as we will explain to them later.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	The great pain of frolic comes from rain and strong winds, and it does not take into account women's needs, so you must do cauterization on the uterus in one part and the other with a caustic clamp that we have mentioned before; and if our cauterizations were done in this manner, there would be three incision lines, and they would provide greater assistance.
de la vessie	Vesicle disease, often referring to conditions affecting the bladder such as cystitis (inflammation of the bladder) or urethritis (inflammation of the urethra), typically involves a range of symptoms including urinary frequency, urgency, dysuria (painful urination), and hematuria (blood in urine). Diagnosis is made via clinical examination, urinalysis to check for signs of infection or blood, and potentially further imaging like ultrasounds or cystoscopy. Treatment varies depending on the underlying cause but often includes antibiotics for bacterial infections, pain relief medications, and advising patients on fluid intake and lifestyle modifications to manage symptoms. Chronic conditions may require long-term management strategies such as intermittent catheterization or surgery if there is a significant anatomical abnormality contributing to the disease process.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	If the bladder is weak and moistened with mucus, causing it to retain urine, then perform caustic incision in the posterior part of the bladder where there are hairs on both sides, one on the right and another on the left side; and each cauterization should be as much as you would poke a finger, either backward or forward, according to your need. Make a caustic incision in the posterior part of the bladder if it requires it; and perform such incision with caustic clamp according to the shape described earlier.
de la marris	of the stone
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	If the stone is cold and moist, and it does not allow for conception, and the flowers are rotten and their ends delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it must be done with three intromissions in the belly, as we have said about cautery of the bladder, and three intromissions on the back; and also with clavicle cautery, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hunchback
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When moist exudates descend to the hernia of the hunchback, and for this reason it ceases to move from its place, and there are signs that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the lesion in a particular segment, then it must be cauterized on the hernia just above the hernial sac with a cautery like a circle, and directed inside the hernial sac as if it were turning around, so that the hernia becomes within the circle; and such cauteries are done as those used for stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, then it is done with large oval cauterizations and also by puncturing in the same way as all other kinds of cauterization; and treat until he has recovered.
de la dolor de la hainche	Pain of the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	If the pain is in the hernia sac, and it's cold and moist, and his maladies should be cured as we have said about division and the cure does not work; for the disease is old: therefore, it must be purged of the large humors with foul-smelling pillules or other solid remedies.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After he had performed the cautery; and the way of this cautery is such as follows: it consists of several medicines in bundles, and fire cauterization according to many methods, which one does so: that you perform thirty-two circular triangular burns on its shape, and make them deep and great, and leave a large distance between each circular burn, and thus the olive-shaped cautery; never done in the midst of the hernia, for it allows there to be twenty-three according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, when the cauterize to the circle that we have mentioned in front of us regarding the dislocation of the hernia; but make it halfway so that the circles contain the entire hernia, and all the edges are sharp.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the way in sciatica, when the pain is located in the hernia and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg; and if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then they make .ij. cauteries where the patient says that the pain lies, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. pieces, a little on the left side; and either cutaneous caustic is applied, or arsenical coating; and if the patient feels that the pain has extended to both legs or near them, then they make .iij. pieces or .iiij. cauteries called "points" on the cautery where it is touched by the pain.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is the skill, then they make more; and when the pain lies on the genital side towards the thigh, then they apply a cutaneous caustic or circular cautery well so that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries too much, and do not cause further harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen others who made cauteries on the joint of the leg, and they allowed it until the whole thigh was freed, and even the knee, and all the joints were examined and decayed in turn; after an abdominal solution that led to death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in .ij. parts combined, make cauteries on one and on the other according to this manner. // And the surgeons said regarding the hernia cautery, do so with such a piece of iron and either place it at the head like a small nutmeg or a little less, or with interlocking pieces between them from space distance as much as a handful; and have the interlocking pieces on .ij. parts, and also in this way, and make an iron punch well made; and this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And burn so much that it becomes red and hot to the touch, and then place it above the hernia of the sick man, and twist it along his healthy side; and after the caustic has been applied with .i. cautery again and left for three years; and make a pouch of wax, and leave the wound exposed for over ten days until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And Albacius says that in this matter we use little of this caustic for the pain of his discomfort, and if there were some good cauteries, which he may endure it; and all is well done.
de la dolor dou dos	sic. Whatmeans fromme:old French. Whichcour: "The- Thecauser (Austinceline. AiXarre'sac andrager. Oldrum fromenture ofxer, thebear.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by falling, or from percussion, or too great evacuation, or due to similar appearances of cold material spread thinly, there is no need for such cauterizations, since that which comes from the infusion of cold material suffices.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is required that the putrid pills or similar signs are voided after this, with three lines of indentation in the back, and in each line one to two causticizations according to virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and it must be done according to the type called "pounds"; and if you see it, do three pounds or four per the knife-like shape following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease occurs in children, and the signs of onset are that they have a narrowing as it happens when they lock up, and fear; and you change in the lower spinal vertebrae of the backbone and the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	Whenever you see it and you heal it, if you causter at the knife according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the causticization colors each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, if you causticize on the spine with the knife-like object in two or three lines, and place the points close together; after curing so that it is healed according to what we have said, and beware not to administer cauterization in a slimy form of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads over each limb' corners, and when the pain comes in spasms, they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicine cannot cure it, then you must cauterize as follows: do a lot of causticizations around the joint connection, and make the causticization olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need that you pierce under the joint, do causticization at all of which they call "point." And when pains come down to genitals and other joints, and this happens many times, then you will make causticizations on each member with two or three cauterizations per part, throughout the olive-shaped causticization; and if there is need for more work, do it, but don't let your hand remain longer than necessary until the arse shows as firm.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pain comes down to the genitals and back, give it causticization as we have said in our chapters. And if the pain is in the hands, make cauterizations with the olive-shaped object; and if there remains no pain at all, then causticizations on each joint and hair, and scalp of the hand, and if it comes down to the thighs or thoes knee joints. And if you governement it well done in good medicine, for cauterize lesse sourne leu qu’est ce quatroce defface.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the procedure of dislocation
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the dislocation appears suddenly, and the limbs descend into their joints, it is necessary that when you see to heal him, he does not move for a day; afterward let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to straighten out his arm until his shoulder has been restored, and reposition the arrowheads in their proper places, and make signs similar to those of a circle above the head of the patient; then heat the cautery according to its shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Until his skin becomes white and feels tender. Then straighten the bones in their proper places; and he instructs that your hand remain fixed so they do not return to their original position; and work well on both thighs of the patient, placing underneayer a pin and soldier under them, and another similar beneath them, which tightens his hands. Then place the cautery in a sign with all your fingers, straightening your arm until you reach the bone. If it does not heal the first time, repeat as necessary so long as you continue working on the bone; but be subtle to ensure that the dislocated joint does not reappear while using the cautery, and do not burn or cause further harm or other illnesses for the patient.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you know that if your work does not extend to the bone with the cautery, it is of no use. The cauteries used on children must be subtle according to their size; and for large people as well, they should be correspondingly sized. After using a burnt cautery to heat the ossified joint for three years until it softens, then heal it with other treatments so that it is sound again, and restrain his painful shoulder for forty days while the wound is well sealed; and you must ensure that patients are bedridden for a long time in such a way that the dislocated joint does not resurface when they move to go to their rooms.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty years when he wishes to rise again, he is fitted with a well-made bandage and kept for another forty years; then enjoy ample rest so that he works little and warns against excessive drinking and eating, as well as loud yelling; and when he follows this instruction fully, it is completely cured. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his apprenticeship.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the dislocation of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When other dislocations occur and are known, and you see that they do not increase in size, so the third part of the cautery follows according to its quantity, and afterward; and no one of the olden have said it should be cauterized by this form: at .iij. angles on the back of un l’esme deus, et a lais.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first sign the edge of the joint and make a line above its surface, and another below it, and put your hand between all the clamps on the shoulder blade. But the first caustic is lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	old pain in no limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When the pain comes in no limb, from a fall or injury, and that pain lasts for long periods, meaning medical treatment is not worth it then it must be causticized with the clamps known as "pounds," and done according to the length of the member and its smallness and fragility and strength and location of twists and torment. If it's sound after the first clamp, that's good; but if not, proceed with another clamp above it, because customarily it must be moved in the limb which is close to it so that you perform the causticizations until the pain subsides.
de meselerie	from messengering or communication.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The message is never given by the clamp with much help, and mainly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of moisture and melancholy. Can you see it causticizing the disease at its beginning, and treating it according to what we have said in the division, so it doesn't hesitate or linger, and you doubt whether the corruption will affect all the pain, for which reason five clamps are placed on top of the chief: one is put near the head and the other towards the forehead; one at the corners, and one behind the knee cap; and it leaves your hand enough so that the clamp can penetrate the bone, and as long as the scars come out forcibly to let the vapors of large humors escape from there, and causticize along the muscle according to what is shown.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the messengering is scattered all over; and it manifestly implies that you should causticize with these clamps we have mentioned: one near the spine of the neck, two on the vertebrae of the back, twelve under the spine of the pelvis, eleven by the spines of the legs, twelve upon the hips, ten upon the ribs, and so forth for each joint in hand and foot; and warn against stones that are beneath the belly not to burn them; and never place a clamp on the bone at the waist, another on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you know that the more clamps you make, the more help it provides; and you know that pain does not feel at all from causticization as long as the patient feels healthy, for the body is completely corrupted. It requires that the clamps be large or small according to the limbs and their articulations, according to what you will find in metalworking. After treating the joints with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until they are cured.
de enfleure	from inflammation.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	The English translation of thees and lesxent:inglish. Allongue anne: 130n.
de albaras	Of barbs
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	The disease that is called "albaras" is old, and the medicine engineer's knowledge is worthless, yet cauterizing it with fire for a little while according to the degree of redness until the blister becomes bone, and its color changes; then treat it multiple times with flour and lentils mixed with olive oil and plantain leaves, and sinew from colt and swan, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, or air it until it is sound.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	If the chancre begins at the beginning, and you see to stop it if you burn with fire that seems like a circle around every mark of the chancre; everything we have heard said about making cauterization also in the midst of the chancre; and all this does not seem good to me because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have never seen it done before; and rather a thing more right is that it be burned around with the "circular" cautery as we said in many cases.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the fever that cannot die (meaning a persistent or chronic condition).
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	If any had an affliction called "adubelati," which delays death or due to its excessiveness (meaning the illness is too burdensome) and weakens him, or because of the great wound when he is decrepit (meaning overly worn out), or for their lack of blood; then you see that it will delay death: therefore, cauterize around with many small cauteries while pressing it; afterwards let it be. For it will postpone its death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it all cauterized, so the shape of this is as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Lei adrepremer.sans lesparle: le meurt, itmeant:mesure of thepeutre london in theesame, Ire pee parlemeasures de la mainte
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens," which is essentially an inflammation of the limb because it affects the limbs just like dry fire does to them; if you see this disease, and can treat it with cautery in one go, then apply the caustic wounds very lightly and strongly according to what it covers or includes in its area until you cleanse all of the corruption, so nothing remains of the disease but everything that is corrupted should be healed. And then let him rest for three years, and afterward allow burns with oil on those cauterized areas until the fire' Writings have healed, and if in three years a healthy scar does not appear, it is good; but if no healthy scar appears, then reapply caustic to that which remains corroded. This inflammation has never been treated with herbal medicine in wounds cleaned by fire; all such treatment with fire is much greater aid, and I have already said the cure for scarring from incision: take as much as you know.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	When referring to stones that fall into the joints, the Old French term "porrelz" can be translated to "pierres," which means "stones." The phrase in question describes a situation where stones may enter and become lodged within joint spaces. This is of particular interest because it relates to medical conditions such as osteoarthritis or other degenerative joint diseases, where debris can accumulate in the synovial fluid and exacerbate pain and dysfunction. The context suggests a discussion on how these stones might be addressed within a medieval medical framework.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often occurs that the joints by excessive use develop a disease called "clos," according to our understanding, which is a significant affliction that bleeds the stone (referring to a bone fragment or foreign object). The treatment for this condition involves two methods. It is fire cautery and hot water cautery; fire cautery is done by applying multiple burns like an arrowhead made of iron, adjusting its size according to the need to penetrate deeply enough into all parts while ensuring it has very fine margins; after heating it, turn your hand completely around the arrow so that it bends at the point where it strikes. Then leave it for three years until it begins producing discoloration; then make a poultice of known medicinal herbs ground with string and let the poultice stay on top of all burned areas throughout the night, and the arrows will pierce through and remove their roots. Then treat the stone with ointments that warm up charms so long as it is cured.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	, ander leu laire, siam iautre:sucels. Thek rage.ilumbre of itaidisc itc dexentence. Leave tage'entres: "theesse. Iescription.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If any shiver from cold or fever, or other ailments, it is said that you should perform: 3 fire cautions on the spine of the back, one each between every vertebra; and 1 needle or 4 under the ribs, and 1 under the stomach to the liver cautery. This will leave the patient shivering but heal the health from cold ailment.
des pustules puans	Of pusful spots
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Never observed in patients with corrupted bowels or pustule-like spots that arise from grossly decaying matter. When such signs appear, it is said that cautery should be performed on each chief of the pustule: one gentle caustic made of mastic tree resin, so that when it touches fire, it adheres to the wound or with a root of Aristoloche long; or a lenticular caustic. And never has cautery been done at the beginning upon such signs in this manner, and they do not grow worse forward but are broken up from the superfluous matter which they arise from, and become healthy; however, it is said that this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the arrow is pulled out
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times happens great loss of blood from the artery that is pulled at the wound coming to purge or at the incision of the abscess, or in cutting into a limb and things like this; and it is very harmful to let out such fluid.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in every case where this happens, if you hasten to place your indicator on the vein's wound and strive much so that it is not aggravated by your touch thereon; then light the fire cauldrons many times and large and small until they are all red hot; and take either one or great depending on the nature of the wound, and in this way keep the arrow directed at the vein where you hold your indicator, and continue to cauterize it so that the blood does not flow.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you push your indicator above the vein and if the caustics are extinguished, then take immediately another of those which are applied in fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	sake (loutre: Fromathe:gall itesuccie210 isue:2cestinct. Iich andrew:secre,tractive. Theuption.sentence:gustarmeans.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	seuntesche insoilletheleteus
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to any and he has no regard or medicine present, then should place his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch him up above the wound and above the vein; and do not move him, but let the moisture from a cold be often enough that it is very cold until the blood does freeze and engorge and remain stuck. And make enquiries about such cases where cautery and medicine are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This marks the beginning of the second volume on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter that such diseases require fire caustic or medicine-soaked cauterization, and its operations, causes, instruments, and forms; and I have laid down this main section here at once with these aims for it to be used more easily according to what is needed.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so it is that I begin, you must learn from this chapter that there is more danger and fear involved in these than in the first cauterizations, and for this reason greater precaution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there are many times the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that many ways of people come to cures. They came from those who suffered so much because of the treatment they underwent for their illnesses, and the severity of their diseases, and for this reason one must have caution.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these who give their opinion and say: "Wait, I am responsible"; the disease is stubborn. You must not readily allow those who come to you with this manner, but provide greater concern for your reputation than for your care, and make decisions carefully about what you are certain will help; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ill patients so that their health may be transformed into renown; and it is these whom you shall aid to gain this good name.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Truly, Our Lord commands us to have sound judgment and uprightness, and if you desire the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to be discussed in a manner that follows the order of chapters, as it is written here at first regarding cauterization by fire and those sections on the subject which are placed closest together for more immediate application.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Seizures that this disease often affects children at birth, and when the baby is held too tightly by its head; and sometimes it comes back again because it cannot be repaired.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease affecting only children, and all those I've observed had a feverish death; and for that reason it seems to me the work is divided into parts of treatment.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child with painful swelling of water (edema), and the head was so congested that it could barely support itself every day; and he believed so much in moisture that his body was covered by moisture on top of the bone above the keel, between the keel and the bone; and the treatment is such as when the moisture covers the keel from the keel to the bone, and the incision is small enough that you make a large cut in the head; and it should be as long as two of us, until the moisture recedes; and then there forms another cavity:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the incision should be larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross: according to this form.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is on top of the bone, and you see the folds at the front corners of each part, and it oozes water when pressed between your fingers; this means that you must make three cuts in the head according to this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, pull out the moisture; then make drapelets and powders from them, and put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and care for the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to heal equally by feeding this malaide (afflicted) person dry meat from a small amount of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of making an incision is to look at the size of the abscess cavity and the accumulation of water therein, as it has never been done before in any direction: neither towards the front nor towards the back, nor to the right side or the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Now cut the abscess and remove the water accumulated therein, and do it according to what you have in mind; but make sure not to block the artery; and keep watching the flow of blood coming out from the wound so that the malaide (patient) can properly recover from the discharge of moisture and the evacuation process.
de reume	De retour (Return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	Tomeffurent en lai.ilice semblant a l’anbale, et li d’unkes decaire que cumme inostre: Aude malade a lopes avalsoubrex : it'souratils:01268themore aout of thees laisse ate.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	:ceter theesculare apejorve tolater itentire ous of alloudre (it.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	re singentiuelangeanime a ceintifles forfielletifrevescannciques sacongeu to tuentheuangeluse  clauses inquireuentesse pocheintielles so enamissezainistralles afeccit' thisangalleux andsoinage
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is pierced, it jumps upward continuously with thrusts.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to touch, it must measure a distance of 2 fingers; then enlarge and pierce through to the bone; and as much blood as this requires (.viij) is allowed to flow, plus or minus a little bit depending on what the patient can bear, and filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone by a small amount, sew the wound open and bandage it, and treat the discharge until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When there is old migration and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples, and ancient foreskin and similar things, and it is treated by medical methods and various forms of treatment; however, we have told you that extracting the arteries and cauterizing them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that the patient's temple hair grows back, and listens to the artery opening in the temple because it opens well with its beating, and few stitches are made compared to those who are too cold; and if it is reinserted, he removes some tunics from his shoulders, then wipes the skin of any rough cloth, and raises the limb with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the speculum of this kind:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the tenderly until you reach the artery, then pull it up to pinchings, and remove well-placed cloths from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn the hook at the tip of the lancet according to the quantity of .ii. fingers. Because if it's not pulled out, it will not jump anywhere in all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the .viij. of blood (which is drawn from them), and if the artery is large, then it must be laced in two pairs of socks made of strong double silk thread, preventing any bleeding at the cautery wound, and hereinmeasured for myofles le scele apresmes chaude .ii. If there is noire arterie.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the caustic is aid to end dampness: for thus it is of great help against dampness.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries it is required that you fill your sleeve with plenty cotton and place it well made on top; and when you remove them, treat them with dry medicines which cause thirst and bandages until they are healed; and if without causing injury to the artery as much as you deem fit, then hasten to cauterize that part with fire, or pour vitriol onto your hand so that the vein is frozen by it; and if this is not present, apply water on the sleeve until the vein is crystallized repeatedly, and raise it from water cold, and restrain it as required; and for those who are more mobile during artery extraction with this cautery slicing .ij. in part, but the cuts should be made well spaced to better contain their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the patient holds too tightly to their heat, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have a considerable distance between the cuts, and when you have sealed them shut with iron, place your hot iron there until it bends to the bone, and pierce the vein through these cuts; and leave space between the cuts because this cautery is not uniformly applied throughout its entire length. And that is the form of this cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of these veins are drawn down from those which lie above the testicles' chief point with fuel and it doesn't profit much from medicine that is done to them; you see the patient's face turning red as if he were frightened, and his forehead becomes moist and damp so that the hair of the papers become wet. And they are held tightly and kept moist until the paper turns black with the heat of tears, which has a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it "cure contuse," and you strike the patient who has this disease with pincers or a knife in such a way that one incision is made on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead, and sometimes one fissure as much as two fingers from the tip of the nose downwards; and others are likewise cut above the paper-thin veins, and keep away from arterial incisions that are made atop those costal pincers. And separate your hand from continuing through the mandibular pincers, and each incision should be of three fingers' length;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And you should make ready a piece of sponge and much linen to wipe the blood from his wound, then strike the artery quickly with about two parts of it, as here is its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that goes from the temple to the second incision; and remove all the clotted blood that is between these two holes above the bone, then make another similar incision just up to the other second one, and then extract this artery.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put in the first hole the instrument called "cultellus," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the cutting edge towards the charred area of the wound, and the blunt end toward the bone, and let it go as far as you can to the next hole while the incision is continuous until you reach what opens the artery, then make another cut in this second hole; and pull out the blood clot evenly, and put a piece of cotton in each hole; and cover the wound with wet cloths made of vinegar and oil and straw moss, and ensure that the edges do not get moisture again; and after three days apply a large amount of cold water to it, then treat the wound with cold turpentine mixed with oil, and other cures for treating wounds until he is well.
dou reume des eulz	Remove the clots from the blood.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is no violent catarrh often seen with clinging and small clots, blinding the eye, scalded papers; and hair grows around its head, and at the top of the wound it hurts a lot, and the patient suffers from severe sternum pain; therefore we know by these accidents that those materials and catarrh do not come from many veins, but rather the treatment that the patient receives.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you command the patient to bend his forehead backward, then make a large incision in front of the forehead, and another wide one; about two inches long. Then start from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side, until it reaches the bone; move your hand away from the temples that move during eating; when the bone is exposed, clean out all the blood with a sponge, and then put cotton in between these two holes of the incision and linen tissue; cover everything above with damp cloths made of wine and oil, and keep them away from moisture; when it heals, you must continue to massage the bone until the blood starts again, then treat him with things that exacerbate bleeding, such as spicy mixtures.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a certain manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of chaff; make a paste from it, and apply it to the wounds in order to exacerbate bleeding throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	On the eversion of the ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	.iiij. Leu quarrere de la: auroise andre (noun, in thees ence:i : ous. Lich aout. ij. Old French, jacour. Itere of thees. Akeur. Forth oculare:escribe, Cyr.: Thees.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it bleeds in the ear or any other way that does not align with the ear, nor grows there, put your ear to the sun. If you see the wound, if there is no trace of violet or sanguinary oil, then I will perform an extraction; and he forcefully exhales from congestion, and snuffs out his nostrils when the exhalation comes, and places pieces of linen or wool in the ear; and the ear is elevated above.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps up during the extraction of subtle double sinew, that's good; if not, I will perform an extraction through a small and delicate incision; and if it does not jump by this means, I make an iron pincers strike and push hard against the ear canal or its entrance hole so that nothing can enter with the wick; then I proceed correctly, because often it happens as we have said; and if it doesn't happen in such a manner, take some moisture on cotton and place any instrument you deem appropriate to do this, and put a little cotton inside; then press firmly against the ear or whatever it may be, and proceed.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump from all these things we have said, then you hurry to fracture the ear so that the abscess in the apical cavity is formed and spasms; and the manner of the fracture so that I make the initial bandage on the cephalic malady, and extract the sanguineous fluid according to its strength, then let me place the malady between my hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear depending on whether it is fat or flesh; and make the fissure as if it were the moon until you reach the wound, and the doctor according to his will, and suck haste from your mouth; and treat the cure so long as he is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's gravel and it swells, I will perform an extraction; and if it cannot be removed, I will perform a subtle delicate incision according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And perform an incision on the grain. But do not make such actions when you think that the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many small pieces; then extract it with subtle pincers and sucking like we have said, so that the extraction is lightened.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	. Other ousage:eraise. The following. Andes tol.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the pulling out of the beast, if it is small in size like we have said for division; but if it is large enough to be felt, prepare the extraction of pinches; and that is the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of ingrown hairs from ears, when you treat them as we have said for division and distillations; it does not benefit at all, you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no ingrowns, you pull out with fine tweezers, and if they are not visible, take a cotton swab shaped like this where the form is located.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow and wide above. And with the more subtle part in the ear according to the amount of suffering from malady, then form the cotton swab; do this as often until all the hairs come out. If they don't obey to come out, tear off the cotton swab like I have said for piercing, and if they don't protrude so much as we have seen in the division of arrows, administer distillations that old people have tried on making cuts on hairs, and you will find or treat with distillations; and if you pour oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, which shape has this form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And of silver or gold is inserted in a small hole above and below for distilling; and to press it inside the distillation with an instrument made of fine rain, if you see a barber and wrap around the point cotton-covered; then pour your oil or juice into the cotton, and what you see from your medicines in the cotton, and let the cotton be placed in the ear; then push inside the barber's towel with all the cotton, pressing firmly until the oil is distilled or comfortably flowing from the ear; and feel the pain of the patient therein; and administer one dose of the distillation at this point by heating it in the ear so much that it does not become too cold, because medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear extraction (referring to procedures related to pulling out ingrown hairs or removing something from within the ear)
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no hollow in the ears; and this practice happens to us through extraction of a wound or nasal tissue within the ear, so these extractions never cause any harm when done properly, and there is never a need for such removal as long as it can be seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, those who suffer this are not seen, it involves several remedies of various dispositions, and in that one must place the painful ear in the sun; and look into it so as you see the extraction apparent, if you do that work with this shape which has this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	:en:sans it'sellement. Ifurre desgars la cestin French. Whatsofracture aimer. il naguainsqueil.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	iflet sondracierresanssecongeuusthancherreurantimeuses  fangleiereanistrentifautile de cuitelesseigneusauriarrechaiodeveriteuissauture  greauxuse thatslaungeuenerniture, thisinisses,ynglume:aiuentures
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not work for any day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powdered with vitriol; if you see that the ear has swollen, let you remove the tent and stir another damp tent made of oil rosette and wax, until the swelling subsides. Then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes forth, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that help stop the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
de la char des papieres	from the paper masks
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This portion of the text describes a process involving paper masks that become moist and dry again. It instructs to stretch them with pincers and prongs before applying vinegar (a substance called spatumile in Old French, likely referring to an acidic solution) on top. The mentioning of vinegar suggests the use of a mild antiseptic treatment for wounds or injuries during this period's medical practices.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortication (skin removal), gently cauterize with two fine cauteries underneayer of the skin and after the incision they heal well; often repairing, but never going back to their roots; and when they are causted by fire, those root structures burn completely and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times there are things formed of hair that resemble gravel in form and hardness, which is why this disease is called "great frost" ("grandine"), as it consists of a thick layer of paper on top and underneath; the treatment for it includes taking care that the great frost does not move one way or another easily, making it a simple matter to know; then take a large piece, scraping each part lightly, and take them with pincers, and coat everything. If you cannot cover a piece of paper well enough, there is nothing wrong for the malade (patient); and if there are big fractures, they make an assembly using a bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and if it's small, no force needs to be applied because ointments restore it almost instantly and soften its hardness.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	The "greve untant acre: les pincees quintes chascartes char teneit de laisse siens.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fingers' fat
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exine is a fat that is infused into the upper layers of paper, and this occurs more in children than in few people, and it causes great pain to their fingers, and it appears on them at mornings, and they cannot see the sunlight because tears stream down their fingers; and for this reason, they lie on their faces afterwards, and sleep there, and their sheets are soaked with moisture from their hands that the skin and appearance have concealed the exine. And when you press your hand to your body and feel the exinach penetrating inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of this operation involves placing the patient's arm on your chest, and then taking a linen cloth in the shape of a circle based on the amount of exine present in each part; you lay it over their limb, pressing one end to yours and the other end with some force so that the exine is concentrated inside the circle. Then moistening the surrounding area around the fissure as wide as necessary, ensuring the size does not exceed the wound'enas; cut along this line, creating a long slit, and let the skin contract in various places until it fits over the exinach; then attach the linen cloth with numerous stitches to contain the exinach. In subsequent configurations, the exinach will come out of this fissure according to the shape of a piece of greasy fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	After preparing the linen cloth between your hands around the incision, rotate your hand both to the right and left as much as it spreads; ensure that you do not overlap in the fissure so that it reaches from one edge of the wound until it touches the oil without bleeding.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the exine does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, gently widen it further until it appears; then stretch the linen as previously described, moisten some additional layers and apply them over the incision, place them on the limb, and secure with bandages for support.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If in such homes where they burn the seal and place it on top to corrupt the moisturizer that is taking too long; then treat as long as it remains healthy, and if there are blisters at the incision site, use dressings of softening emollient so as to keep it well-healed.
des poilz des papieres	Of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	From papers arise hairs other than natural ones, and they become old if they harm the body, as it brings on habits of illnesses similar to accustomed tears and softening of the papers, so long as it is due to the destruction of the hair; and there are four treatments for this: or by cautery in a bundle of fire, or by medicine with ague according to what precedes, whether it is from the treating physician's practice or cautery alone, and they do so either by incision and suturing, or by chains, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is required that you place the main hair in your sanctuary (body), then turn the paper oil in your right hand; if it is converted, it's good; if not, put an arrow above each of its two filaments; and whether this happens near the edge of the paper or where the hair grows next to these hairs, and draw a thread on top of the paper, and turn it back to the razor; then work in the part of the paper with misplaced hairs all over, from the great margin to the little one; draw a thread, and put a small tent of canvas and drapery above the paper, and make an image on the paper like that of a pestle (potter's wheel), as you have seen when lighting a candle, and in any case it is required that the figure be according to the quantity you lifted up from this paper which has been fixed over all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if the part that requires a great quantity of paper according to how much the paper is malleable; then work on all the four lines you have marked, and start from the large margin next to where the natural hairs are located in the root's circumference, then push the incision into one of the two angles formed by these hairs, then scrape it entirely; assemble the two lips together with a suture made from an aguilettes fine thread of wool, and wash out the flesh, and draw away the excess threads above the three sections that are attached to any other things sticky. If you do not need this cure, then let the suture remain for three years; then treat the wound with various drying and constricting remedies, because the paper recovers from the heat of the wound and the assembly thereof, but the suture is a mixed matter (as they say); it is required.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a shape as much like the fennel bulb we have told, which can be done in three steps according to this form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take up those small equal-sized pieces according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the pliers to hold them, and what you use is not equal in size, take an awl or one piece of thread, and place it in the figure; then insert another piece of thread beyond the large margin, and a second piece of thread near the small one, and join all your threads evenly; then move your hand gently over everything that has been stitched, as we have told you, then assemble the .i. lacerations of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed; and when the abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with ointments and various anointings.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there is never the case where the paper's hair becomes converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision; however, the suturing in both ways is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of the sutures is according to this form: and it requires that you convert the paper and weave them as I have said, and then make .i. sutures by art, and also .i. loops as long as the sheet and the large gap are; take hold of the .i. pieces or threads that you keep in your hand; then weave the one with the other under what is above the paper covering the oil, and stretch out the .i. sutures from the .i. parts formed; let it be so for many years, and the skin which has been woven will harden and shrink, until it returns to its original state.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then you must apply great force, and treat it until it is healed; and when the wound has been sutured, and if the paper sheet has risen, and no longer do the hairs stick out; and this is the form of the loops that you will make according to this figure, and in accordance with this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you will need a fine awl, and insert one silk and fine thread therein; then assemble the loops and place them gently together, and make the length of each thread about one palm long; then take another thin silk thread slightly braided, and tie it to the chiefs of the other threads; then put your mallet in its place beneath the hair growth where the sutures are declared, as these are delicate and fine sutures. Then thrust the awl into the root next to the natural hair therein so that you trace them out from above the natural hair off the paper sheet; then pull out the hair down through the thread in the paper, and tear it away from the natural hair beneath, until you reach below the hair follicle. Then retract your hand as far as the hair grows along the thread on the paper with the natural hair therein.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	ilz:12ail andes cease il veille.tract. Theonce levre.savoir andre itseiz.vrai seithingle, only, the following :avei. Andsure ofnose. Whatmesin.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of moisture of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, known as "aleacrati" or the oil dislocation, is caused by moisture in the oil, it manifests through two types of movements: one natural and the other unnatural. It arises from a wound, cutting, or cauterization, among similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment for this involves fracturing the suture, draining its lips, and placing linen tenting within it until it heals; and there is no need to use anything in the cure that dries or restricts. For if you perform such actions, the disease may worsen rather than improve; but using softening methods like fenugreek; and boiling water, wheat flour, linseed seed soaked, and diaphoretic ointments melted in any oil – these are enveloped within a tent, and this method is used for the cure.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure consist in that you must take care it does not heal according to its original shape; and these methods we have mentioned do not return this disease into the condition it was previously but rather preserve its current state, maintaining the form as it is now.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	This phrase "de la char qui vient en l'oil" translates to "the salt that comes into the oil." In a medical context, this could refer to an ancient understanding of saline solutions being used in conjunction with oils for various treatments. Historically, mixtures like these might have been employed to help maintain hygiene or assist in certain healing processes by utilizing the properties of both salt (for its antiseptic and osmotic effects) and oil (to provide a moisturizing effect).
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that truly occurs where the term "axacrati" is applicable – a variation in pronunciation or regional dialect of the time from "aleacrati" for joint dislocation – is both natural and accidental. The accidents arise from wounds, fissures, cauterization, and similar events; and as regards this method of treatment, you must pierce with a needle that has two threads, then fasten the thread through the left margin to such an extent that the filament bends in .ij. joints (possibly indicating an error or misunderstanding due to language evolution); then place the char near the surface of the needle, and the char over an open cavity large (.i. spatumile) for treatment purposes.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	udeautentance ituseisileletallateratimeetteneraisewite
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or tear or cautery, it is required that you make a straight incision in front of the hairs; and according to what has been said before; then open between the two joints of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and each master devises an arrangement for all possible positions that he can make return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what the treatment requires and the various preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	A cleaving of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this sealing happens to the patients in part similar to how the paper above is glued with oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural actions, then you must first cut a razor along the paper; and bind up high; and pinching, as long as you do what is required at the subtil spatula, which is not too sharp nor too rough, so that the patient does not suffer if the spatula is too sharp or bleeds oil; and it becomes your incision, from which you scrape together lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and when assembled, there will be no more watered-down oil, nor wax cloth, nor linen moistened with water; and place wet linen over the oil, and then after a few days use two spatulas and similar things until it is sound.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the one piece of oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Separating the one piece of oil into two ways: it is nervous and looks like a certain hardness or stiffness, and another that is not nervous but resembles a moistened mushy state; when touched with iron and pinned as closely as possible without causing harm to it, both of these appearances start towards the great margin, growing slowly until they cover the entire field and all light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision is that it sets the patient's head in relief, then hold up the paper with your hand, and make two small doubled hooks over the pincers above; and they remain above. Then take a needle, and the threading soaked in blood, and the spatula of small forces, and let it return to its natural shape: and li's form, si laineaux que les larmiere est leu li malaide la carte, et dure deffondre.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	signexan ightimes andiagneurs.hectilongerguexentiofairececans ndepeuconsecrede candeveles himantiolecres
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail subtly, and if you see that it does not reduce and reason presses on it afterwards, let from your mouth a liquid made of litargine and red clay poultice and wolf's bane oil, and apply it for another day; then repeat this operation according to this method until the nail is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the oil, as in an abscess, then first treat the hot abscess until it becomes healthy, and then repeat this operation again like before, continuing until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh at the nail causes great harm with the oil, suspend it from its place, and cut off a part but not all, so that no tears flow; then make a poultice made of red clay mixed with litargine.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the hair growing above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some people have never had red hair, and they cover the pupil with paper and bind it tightly until it returns to normal, making it look like a bull's eye; then this operation is performed so that the patient can maintain his head upright, and then perform the rest of these actions: first, make all unnatural curls convenient for this purpose, and support them with strength; next take out the first curl, and go combing over the razor right up to the end, making sure not to cause bleeding in the operation; and it is the small incision we mentioned in the joint of the nail and its little forces that appear afterwards after this chapter's demonstration.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and the hair grows back, if you use wolf's bane oil or pour a clay poultice red mixed with it along with other corrosive remedies, and put cotton soaked in beeswax on top of the abscess; and if nothing happens, then let it not resurface from an abscess, and doubtful abscess, if you leave the oil and treat the abscess with things calming to abscesses, and return to your work as long as it is healed. And so create char similar in appearance in the oil by this example.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But the healing of all these minor operations from natural course; and in the metalwork; and do not put your hand out on any of these works.
des voines des eulz	of veins the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Red veins that are covered by oil, and they hinder one's view of the work and weaken it throughout the years. The art is then to first look at those veins; since this is so, indeed there is no other disease as severe for the liver but its own; nevertheless, in such a manner: command the patient that he places his head on your bed, then let these veins be relaxed all over the body according to their wisdom, and be they subtly doubled according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And they should be doubled in degrees in one corner as per this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then we should gradually reduce those veins subtly and allow the blood to flow out after another hour, as long as you can see these red veins being pushed away from the oil; ensure that you do not disturb the oily points of the spleen, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, staying very attentive so that only those veins are affected; once you have done this, if it is necessary to distill a green-and-red oil in the spleen cavity to dissolve what remains with the liver.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot reduce everything in that hour, then apply soothing substances to the oil for alleviating the pain of those veins, and leave it untouched for as many days as long as the pains are relieved and secured from puncture; then resume this method until it is fully healed according to the pattern mentioned before.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the spleen oil (assuming "de la fistule" was intended to refer to a related treatment involving the spleen's oily substance)
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The more severe cases are called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and hot medication as I have previously mentioned, if she is not healed, then it becomes an evil in her that causes death by cutting into the abscess, and you must drain all accumulated moisture until the issue is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, if it's covered with every instrument necessary for this form; we shall call it an "aspre chief," and make it in a particular manner of two chiefs stacked upon one another like a current lime; and let it be sharpened accordingly to its present shape.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Do noteplace en lai.souverain: "fait, quins paroles. Leusin the. In it isa ices d'ailleans of course of this sentence.n. I wantentil translation. Laurette. The Old French and English. Aesolden.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	nascure apexentifrelet.tandrece Tecte tye.0lege mescurevale outwardreconsexatientefstefeu�thates oulite.leste ceure,ocite lcelafte.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then he places it on the bone near the shoulder joint, and withdraw your hand for a little while, then turn it all around until it pierces through the bone and you feel the pain in that place if his touch enters into it so much that he holds his hand on his neck; and then reapply dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows tougher and hardened, that thing becomes easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	The dislocation occurs.
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the arrows' wounds are opened entirely and do not disturb the nerve or soften it, then you must bandage him with a layer of aloe mixed with ashes and frankincense and muslin; and brace the cloth so that the drapes are sufficiently padded, and double each one in three layers; then tightly wrap the wound above and below using an elastic bandage to press on it without causing pain; let the dressing be worn day and night, and when you see the edges of the arrowheads flatten out, that is good; if not, restart the dressing and braces and bandages until the arrow's wounds are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The tearing down of a cloth or tapestry.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the tapestry or cloth, it happens because of small particles like resin dust that are visible; but if you cover it with fabric operations similar to sewing a needle into the root of the affected area above and then another needle or one double thread on either side of the shoulder joint; sew it well, then tighten the second needle according to its placement, and tie the double thread around part of the cloth, leaving it slack, and let the first needle loosen and apply a damp cloth, keeping it moist until the threads pull with the vein, then dry the cloth with comforting remedies as long as the wound heals; but sometimes the wound is restricted by the cloth in one part of a circle around the shoulder joint while it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arrows give a subtle appearance of penetration beneath the scapula (shoulder blade), and correct the bluish moisture by applying oil to it, then gently press inward so that no fluid remains; then extract it as much as possible until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of the bow of the arrow (referring to the projectile).
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	itin the year 120s:sesmej'olday medieval Latin-Old French (a century.
des aigues de l’oil	of oil fever
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have seen the examples of fever division, and this is what it requires; if done according to health. It requires that you position the patient between your crossed hands towards the light of the sun, so that their blood is fresh and tightly pressed; then place the paper with the blood in your right hand next to its side, or in your left hand on its side; then take in your right hand (which has its side opposite) a tool called "almada," or in your left hand (which has its side facing you), another tool called "almada"; then place the tip of this instrument near the crown by guiding an awl into the blood vein, and push it in until it pierces the vein; and require that the path of the almada be at the end of the distance marked on the paper for the pulse measurement, which is also the circumference of the crown; this is the crown. If you see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the horn-covered cloth, then place the instrument there or where the fever is located, and squeeze out a path after another one. When the fever reappears, if it appears before him and the instrument in his blood.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting .i. little, and the fever rises again along the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, pull the almada quickly around your hand a bit more; then withdraw slightly from the blood some jewelry, and separate this oil within. Then coat the wound with rope or linen soaked in oil and abundant of beeswax, and join it with the fresh blood. And those who are of our time, we place underneath a broom with abundant honeycomb.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almada cannot enter into the blood by its sharpness, because some have too hard hands, it requires that you straighten out the instrument called "alberit," which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	seingle.i.courts, et quin theurs:especialesme lesa.gauge laitnague theurs ioure'sac.i.tendra le.causeur leu of theurel. Hereaures aigue. I’siumera.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	devoirre 1
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Yerach, who said that in our land they made an almagate by pouring water over it, so that the fire would succeed, but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our land or in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new invention.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the shapes of the almagate forms, because those who do not see them cannot know; and they should be made with pure rainwater.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let us be aware of this subtlety in this method, with a water angle of four corners.
de la char sor le neis	from the water source for the nails
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No nails are ever born or created in various shapes because there aren't any that seem like scorpions with a lot of legs; and if they have such types or colored with black or white color, it must be done to make the patient lie on the maladie (a reference to the almagate) between your hands against the sun; blow into its nostrils, drip oil onto those nails, and pull out the ingrowing nail from there, then do whatever you need to support the delicate thin sharp one of a kind underneath, so that you know it is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is still nothing that cannot be covered up with one or two delicate touches of oil on the nails; and it doesn't hold anything back in any way; and if you don't press it down, or incise it, as it must cover; and if it's malignant lesions, then hasten to cauterize so that neither there nor anywhere else are ingrowing nails formed, and then apply oil again either warmly or cold.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nails are done in this way, you will see that he is sound again; and if they don't pierce as it must do, then you will know that there is no new ingrowing nail growing above the bone. And with these tender shoots put a thick thread of linen cloth about them, place one piece between your hands, and let him see after each other in such manner, this easy thing to those who want it; do it three years as you can see that char have corrupted nails. Then clean the wound by oral soffits with oil made plum, and pour legerly ague en lait for ailure of four angles:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	nacue laisser,ille, theirelore dexte:geste garde venerve tise.sseurs ceurexent (toi :ce apexe.ssex,cumence :seille. 3lesse laisse.sejaclet himbeignes,ifrechefections.
de la char sor le neis	Of the shoulder joint from the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the neck of the shoulder joint suffers from a disease called "tulli", and it grows and becomes large enough to be seen; and because of this it must be treated at first, and the bone is well covered by the cautery or hot medicine; and if it takes too long to cover it when it has become great, then take care if it is hard, rough-colored, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted point, for if you handle it in any way, the patient suffers greatly. And if the touching place is of a burning nature, and you can cover the entire area, then empty the patient's sense and treat the joint rigidly and restrictively.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck of the shoulder joint is cauterized and infected
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Seeking solutions in one of these outlined chapters brings little profit; none should apply them to any man since it benefits no one when the wound is fresh throughout his whole body. Therefore, first alleviate the two sides with a cautery, then treat until they are healed; and if the lips are sore on both sides, you must scrape all affected parts of their mouths as long as they heal, then assemble the two lips into one seam, and bind them, and sprinkle powdered dragon'inasinence, and incense upon it. Then place a piece of iron or another strong iron above the powders, let it burn through the wound for him until it heals, and treat with ointment as long as they are healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the seam is that you assemble it with either needles or thread, as we have mentioned in the sewing of the abdomen; or with a string, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	The lesions of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	A main houses suffers from hard lesions of the lips, resembling grains, and smaller yet more abundant; therefore it must be turned (the lips), and cut each one in two parts, and take them as pinchings, and treat each part in turn; then apply the wound with vitriol and sulphur after the incision, and then cure the joints rigidly until healed.
de la char des gencives	of the gums' edges
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it bleeds under the gums' edges where they used to call it "albulus"; this means you must hold it with tweezers and address its root, allow the blood or clot to drain away; then apply vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders after healing from the incision. If it returns afterwards, many times it happens again, so if it recurred, second time cauterize: if it does not return afterwards, these are the forms of stumps to cover them up.
des sordens	of disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the tooth's root, between the gums, which are ugly and harsh scabs; and there have been instances where a black and yellow-colored tooth with crevices appears until the corruption reaches the gum tissue, making it stinky. You must make the affected area lie in your palm and hold its head firmly within your hand while pulling out the teeth or scabs as long as nothing interrupts; you should then perform blackening and greening, yellowing, and other treatments on these until they become world-worn. If it is understood that this was done for the first reason, it is good; if not, it will recur again after two more days and with the second treatment so long as everything has been retrieved. It should be noted that teeth need various forms of dental instruments to extract them, according to what the procedure demonstrates, because other tooth extractors have different forms than those used between the gums; these additional forms and others must be prepared by you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is required that when you treat the tooth's pain and it takes a long time to relieve, as this should not be done; because there is no justification for such aggressive extraction. The emphasis here underscores the importance of being cautious with treatment duration and methodology when addressing dental pains. Aggressive or overly invasive procedures without sufficient cause can lead to unnecessary harm rather than benefit, which highlights a fundamental principle in patient care—first do no harm (primum non nocere).
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	lait well. coment morne il souce tene desir. parle mentis voire dame itale lector apear ieval. Amendele: "Ala ent's laitale itaure of the following versio. I's avalve laitur a lai surge.entire aye, fromage.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After straightening the tooth carefully, and if it does not jump, then take none of these instruments and thrust into each part lightly, and move so as you have done before. And when the density is perceived and melted, it must be filled with linen or wax; and if tightened subtly with tweezers, that it should not break while stretching; and much effort will have to overcome the nerve in order to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And do it well to ensure that you don't break it, and leave a part there, and bring back the malady to the patient through the mischief of the root, causing greater pains at first than what we have told; but they never come by this great disease for the roots or because they break the cartilage, as we often say; rather, when fragments are removed from such a fragmented area, wash it with wine or silt and clay; and if there is bleeding coming out of it, sometimes happens, then moisten it with vitriol; and if this does not value it, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, for when you first touch the tooth, should be long and have large handles, so that they do not double up as you pull the tooth. And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be sturdy enough not to bend during extraction, and made well of iron, and designed for holding securely.
de la racine des dens	related to the roots of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with wax on the socket for a day or two, as long as the roots are softened, then insert tweezers called "algebris," which make the teeth seem like they have been taken care of; and these should be made in such a way as if it were a chisel.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not yield to all these tweezers, it is necessary that you penetrate deeply into the root, and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as pliers; and this has the form of a two-pronged tool.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And whether it's large and sturdy so that it doesn't break; if the root jumps out with this, it's good; but if not, using all instruments, the forms come next as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it's use toi. Soit de ces instruments of the fie leer: Leu les estoyer ceorne que lou mals descoin. iaire cestriens a unescrevion lou laissance quatorline ciatient devisesaisen. Fornethsreliber toi'fairle deit,alien.décor (thewoman. Toilet. Whatis itineration desires:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments are used before for reasons of density, and this instrument which seems to be large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument should not break, and know that many instruments for density are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the masters skillfully handle their own instrument by themselves, according to what his works and illness show, because he has various diseases or the old did not teach about an instrument for these differences in bones and others, so it breaks nothing or weakens them, or he tries with instruments that I told you, and help from gestures, as shown here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well-shaped to hold the bone so that it does not drop but holds it and heals; and then restore the position of medicines suitable for this case, and if there is porriture in the bone and it is small, then use all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth does not correspond with its natural shape and form is ugly, especially in women's teeth, it must be known whether the bone after the tooth is damaged and not aligned correctly, and cannot be smoothed or sharpened; therefore, make the cut (incision); if there are jagged edges next to the tooth, take this instrument whose shape I have described, similar to a small bird's beak, and it must be sharply curved in steel:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cope (cutting tool) is small and uses it for a moment because of the hardness of the tooth, and for this reason you do not move other teeth and if it can be smoothed, then use this limerick with one-third part as I have described its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the cutting tool we use to make needles; and with it cut small pieces of the tooth slightly so that it does not move while curving; then in the end there should be no roughness at all, and if the bone protrudes too much and bites the tongue, it must be smoothed until it is equal, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth loosens:
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth loosens in front, or by percussion or decay, and the malicious one cannot press on it so that he does not bite it; and you treat them with restraining medicines, but they are worthless; if you bind it with gold wire, for silver wire becomes greenish-blue and corrodes, while the gold never breaks. The wires should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the distance between the teeth; and if you want to dress the dens. Then take this doubled in two healthy teeth, so that it can move very slightly: then start pulling the wire andoldenjour.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	:eslatedressure andrescripiths. aire. Allgust.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of covering the tongue's line
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Never has it come from the tongue or nature itself, that they nip in such ways; or through an accidental wound sealed shut. The operations performed on the patient's mouth and head ensure a healthy testes, and lighten the tongue's nervous system so much that the tongue is freed from its attachment, even if it has hardened or not, as long as it comes from the suturing of an injury; be sure to prevent the fracture from becoming too deep, for the artery located there. Once you have done this, raise a moist rose water or cold water and place it under the tongue, then wrap the mouth with linen cloth at night, and dry lichen on the patient's tongue each time it swells to prevent sores forming. If blood comes from the wound, put vitriol on the wound; if bleeding persists, cauterize slowly using lampblack pigment, which is beneficial for this purpose. Then treat with other treatments until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a fissure of black or brown color or hardness, it should not be felt by the malade for it is a sore; and if it is declining to bluish bruise and has moisture, let the incision heal; and in case there are no results from that treatment, place vitriol on the wound until it becomes thoroughly cauterized. Then continue with other treatments as long as necessary, applying a fine spatula under one side and another under the opposite side. And if this does not improve at your work, apply vitriol repeatedly until it heals completely; then raise the tongue to warm or soften ice water, and treat it with other treatments until fully healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Stomatotomy of the throat. This term historically refers to a surgical procedure where incisions are made into the tissues of the oral cavity, specifically within the mouth on either side of the tongue (as mentioned earlier), but it can also extend to procedures involving the area around the tonsils and pharynx if we consider its broader use. However, please note that such invasive practices would be considered highly unusual in modern medicine without thorough understanding and justification based on contemporary medical research.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	None of the vocal cords that are called "godath" and they clean them properly. If they're not healed, and you should take care: if it is a small cracking incisions; and here's voice (crystal lice. Andropure
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue to all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the stinger and the stick in the apple tree, and throw it above more than you can; and don't touch any cloth with it, then place the cover on the instrument, so that way its shape resembles some force; and everywhere the head is bent, and one side to another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or hemp.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument, then the cover with pliers has this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And divided on one side and on the other named; and when you have caught one apple seed, then catch the others in that manner, and after the incision rinse the patient's sore mouth with warm water, and saliva, and if they are discharging blood, or if quince seeds are baked, or fig leaves, or similar things, until the throat is free; and the cure so long as he is sound; but never does another abscess form in the throat besides these two apples, which you catch and bind like the two apples.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I treated a woman with an abscess in the throat, which was so large that she could not breathe through the obstructed passageway and couldn't eat or drink; and if it had continued for one year or two, she would have died. The abscess was so deep that there were eight openings around it. I immediately opened it, then pulled out some of the flies, and extracted a large amount of blood; then I put another piece into each opening in her neck, pressed her mouth, and pushed her tongue. Afterward, I placed an olive leaf on these abscesses and took a portion off them, extracting only a little sanguineous fluid from the wound; thus obstructing the passage of breath through her throat, she began to drink water and then wine, continuously working at cauterizing this abscess for over ten days. Then I reopened it in the throat: so that there was no further growth. And God did not let me get away without helping her afterward.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	s :carpe.gents.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let there be a chief who applies medicine as if using a ladle, and places the instrument all over the vein; and the patient is lying on his side so that saliva and muscle secretion flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, preventing it from going down the throat, and bleeding; then take your hand with all the medicine and press it on the vein for about an hour until you see the mixture thickened and the medication's bites are soothed; and if you see, take a cotton and wrap it in any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument around the cotton in the cannula above, until the cotton dries on the vein; do this often enough until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry for two or four years, and if you need to redo the cautery of the medicine, when you reapply it over the vein with cotton wrapped in cloth, and treat with cold water baths and gargling so that it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is more suitable for incision rather than cautery; if it's performed through fumigation according to this method, take calamine and yarrow and rue and chamomile and other herbs, and mix all of them or some of them in one pot, and leave it aside, then let the pot boil well; and make sure the pot is tightly sealed with strong earth, and place a suitable instrument on top according to this method.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Whether it's silver or iron, and place one of the hooks in the patient's mouth until the vapour rises into the vein through the cannula, as long as the vein is thrombosed; after this procedure repeatedly, so that the vein dries out, and make sure you do not start at the beginning of the aposteme period, because many other things happen; and if this instrument isn't present, take a cannula and place it under the patient's upper lip with an olive leaf (ulven), so that the mouth doesn't have too much pressure; since the olive leaf does not allow excess vapour to irritate the mouth, and it is a good combined treatment.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is done to the throat or the spine of a fish or nothing at all; therefore you must treat what you see and press the tongue with the instrument in the sunlight, so that you can see the thing change; and if it does not open up and returns to the throat, then make him vomit the patient's malady until the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps such a thing might be expelled by vomiting; or the malady may absorb a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a slice of lettuce, or .i. piece of dry bread; and tie a string to it, and then strain it; and when it reaches your hand, if it does not happen as we have mentioned, then take an instrument shaped according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	s:nacces:
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the moisture of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Never is the moisture treated in the throat as I have mentioned in medicinal division; and when it does not benefit, look at the ill-tempered person's throat under the sun with the instrument I told you about; if you see the moisture, treat it with any small unguent or delicate tweezers that are worth such. If this is not valuable, take a bleeding lancet and place it in the ill-tempered person's throat, then hold a hot iron in their throat for some time; and if the illness turns blue all day long, then take a full glass of cold water, work on the mouth, and let the mucus come out with the hand often; and as soon as the moisture feels the cold, it will decrease.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If it does not decrease as we have described, smoke the ill-tempered person's throat with the instrument I mentioned in the upper lung fumigation; do this many times because she will resist being pinched. The manner of the fumigation is that you use a pot containing charcoal pieces and cover it tightly with a woven cloth held by its handles, then pierce this into the chest with the instrument; apply the smoke to her head with the caustic, placing it in her mouth so that the smoke does not escape but penetrates the moisture; and now she will resist, and if it does not decrease, repeat the fumigation many times. Let her suffer thirst, give her dirty things to chew on, and do not let her drink water; instead, it is the custom that she be made to expel by this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument used to treat the moisture is such that when you see it, its appearance resembles twisted tongues to push into the throat; and it has a shape like a caregiver's beak and roughness from grinding stone, so that whatever she takes, she cannot relax. And here comes the description of the instrument:
li chapistres des apostemes	The physicians of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Among the various types of abscess treatments mentioned hereafter in this book, there are differences in incision and size; and it is done through two manners, one resembles me myself, as I remember it from this text, and by which he holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are on their corse: because the chief of an abscesses is different from these foundations, and the head of a lump in the body is different than those who come together at joints; each has to do with his own way.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if at incisions it is not necessary to penetrate, as long as the bone has completed its formation; and if such joints require penetration when they are formed, and do not die according to their completion, like at the joints near the edges; For when an incision comes from the edge of a joint, and it is left until it pierces through, by chance its ligaments and nerves at the joint may be damaged, so that this contraction affects the main member. Or the incision is located in the main member, and if you delay penetration until it has become brittle, then it will harm the main member; or it is near the foundation, and if you pierce there while it is still alive, then it may form a fistula that extends within it, and cannot heal properly. And it should not be penetrated at joints where the digestion process has completed, such as those near the foundation, which would allow damage to extend within it, causing it to swell and widen; and it cannot mend in a significant way.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the incision which has died according to its completion; and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and reduction in pain and swelling, and relief and improvement of the chief part of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation dependent on the location of the incision, and whether it has opened or not; and if the perforation is long, and if the incision is in hands or feet, or joints and nerves, and in all its limbs or it does not have any deformity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	For such deformities, according to the extent of its digestion completion, if you pierce it then along the vein will be long streaks of blood and full of waste; and by chance harden its lips and corrupt its internal parts; And for any incision that is penetrated in a large diameter, according to which the limb requires it. You must make small incisions, small holes; and for large ones, larger holes, and many fissures according to the appearance of its hardness; if such an incision requires healing the wound or covering it, when it has become as soft as a cloth; and if you do with such injuries as those that are fissured in three angles, or like the flasks used for making myrrh oil from frankincense resin glands of dragonflies. And if there is an incision where they make round cuts, or other types of cuts and coverings similar to how a blowgun makes its mark on a target; and if such an incision requires creating a specific shape, or other shapes and finishes.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	se dexement.ultes. Theesse,the. That the endandentefles.3llessexte aille.ssextre anempejordex cece.me causecellevessex a presure ouparmeignes soauxseursective arecisseurrandeute asharnex se tabellexes de
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when blood flows from the joint in your work, you will apply cold and gentle water, and a cloth, and moisten it repeatedly;  And if the blood flows from the joint persistently, you must govern it with care and treatment, and use the powders I mentioned earlier in this book, and if it is internal or the abscess cavity is very nervous, then you must cover them with tent fabric and hot water, oil, or wine; And if it is within a stone, and the limb is fleshly, then you must moisten them with warm water and oil, or cold and oil until tomorrow, as we have said; and then release the abscess and wound and treat accordingly.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is essential to know everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: this I have told you about how we should go before treating abscesses, and now the physician says.
des soros	This appears to be a fragment of Old French text without context or meaningful content that can be translated directly into English. "Des soros" does not form a coherent phrase in either language based on standard medical terminology or phrases from this period. It may simply be an error, such as a misspelling or misinterpretation of the original text.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	When the abscess is small and resembles that of a hedgehog's footprint; it also has fatty and other types like poultry feet which are hard and sharp in nature. There is no doubt about whether this artery does not go against what was said before. The procedures for treating an abscess with every instrument called "entombed" because of its shape, as follows: If it contains moisture, it will break through the skin by itself; if the moisture has been drained away from the lesion that contains it, nothing should be left in the wound, so that when you let it go again after a day; or with cotton poultice Egyptian, if it is still present; but if not, use wet and dry cloths, as well as treating the wound, leaving it to heal for another day; then treat those which are delayed by night. Then repeat the use of the poultice according to what was said before in a second year, until you can confirm that it does not delay beyond a night; and cure the wound with an Egyptian poultice as long as necessary, so that nothing is left on it or its dressing: if the artery goes against this treatment, then do what I have told you afterwards. And also treat the abscess if it's rough, whether in a groove and by cure as I said before.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting on the abscess and the moist one, it is lighter because they contain little blood. And if there are some of these cuts or heads or center where there is no moisture, and of these there was .i. cut that I made or head from an old woman; and found the cut to be also like a rough, hard, and blunt stone, and it could not be broken; and if anyone had broken one, they would have done well as for breaking a stone. In other abscesses coming out of the center, since these that come out of the heads and roots of ears, the overgrowth always remains dependent throughout life, to allow the bowel to emerge; and treat it as required.
des scrophules	Skin ulcers.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck collarbone area and in the grooves and underneenas, never appearing elsewhere or elsewhere; they are large, intermingling with one another like the head center and such abscesses as we have described; there are also many of those that contain moisture, and malignant ones that do not respond to health. When you see a good disposition on the skin, similar to the color of the cornea, and silent in every part and not separated from the neck nerves or artery, it indicates that you should scrape this abscess over it and examine each lip as we have described for centers; and treat them little by little, ensuring that the nerve does not suffer harm or tearing like a splint or strain, so that the hands do not hinder, nor press too far ahead to avoid causing anything undesirable.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you scrape the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work on it, then apply vitriolic sulfur or any other substances that congeal blood, restricting the wound; let the abscesses be soothed and softened until they start to grow. And when these abscesses are discomforted, return to your work, continue as long as you complete it; then treat those small ulcers by cutting them in their roots and leaving them fall apart with a double strong thread, causing no harm; then dress the wound with large Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the entire scrophula, it is required that you assemble the two upper lips of the wound and press them now; for there is no delay due to the size of the scrophula. It is required that you understand how to cover the root of it, and draw out forcefully, and press as we have said. Those scrophulas with superfluous amount will dry up and die; and this perforation in the same manner as before, depending on it, then I will instill bandages with oil and similar things, so that what remains corrupted does not continue to decay; and when the wound is properly treated, the oiling cure tightens until he becomes healthy.
de squinance	Squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the fashioning of the throat; but I have never seen it done anywhere in our land, and this is their written account.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those with squinting, it is required that the epiglottis in the throat be removed; and we do not help them for this reason, because all other voices and murmurs of the malady are found in these individuals who have an abscess in their mouth, or in their throat or in .ij. almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the murmur, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid the fate that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it requires us to make holes of .iij. or .iiij. circles or .iiij. a small incision through which the crosscuts are made, not in the skin but between the circles according to the size of the incision.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those parts are cut away from the section of the epiglottis without cautery, and the wound is longstanding.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are afraid, it requires extending the skin of the throat to all its extremities before cutting the tissue until it turns white in the neck; and remove the stones of blood, if you see nothing, and then make the incision as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the neck that bleeds through the hole which was broken, and by the defect in the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound a little bit.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and there is no doubt about strangulation, gather the two upper lips of the wound's skin flap, press it firmly with a bandage; then administer remedies that produce heat until he becomes sound again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	And we do not make the fendure de la seneiour parole desgive ince itentillement of .iiij.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	And now comes the cautery on the epiglottis because the maladies cannot be restrained, and it breathes through the wound, and thus one must guard against death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this reason they command the wound to be left open as long as the sickness of the disease has passed, either in two years or in three years;
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it until it was treated.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut the skin around the wound;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I called on him to cure her, and found her also in death;
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and realized she hadn't cut her throat or abdomen at all, but rather through the wound itself.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurriedly went to attend to the wound and healed it until she was healthy again;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there wasn't anything wrong with her voice anymore, and afterward she returned to her normal state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	For this reason I said that in the treatment of the epiglottis there is no cause for fear;
de la grosse gorge	of a large throat, but rather:
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large wounds with the color of jet, and they occur frequently in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and according to about two ways: natural causes or accidents; or naturally there is no mechanism involved.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents are according to two ways: one is similar to us as food (suggesting that some conditions may be accidental and resemble diseases caused by consumption), and the other method arises from our arteries (indicating that some issues might stem from vascranial causes).
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and he has no fear, but must work on small wounds that are in the body, and tests it thoroughly in all its internal parts;
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you treat it as we do with any other great wound, and don't worry about its cost, for he will cure it as one does in our time, and test every part of the body where there may be signs.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine it carefully and treat it as required, until it is perfectly healthy again.
des nous	And our, meaning that we know now how it is done by us.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways to treat our bodies, which I will describe in detail;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is necessary that I tell you all the difference between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is fever and chills holding on until the heat passes, and it accompanies pus formation; however, when the fever subsides and the heat leaves, there will be relief from both the fever and the inflammation.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With our treatment there is no fever or pain and contains .I. sack, which is its own container and has the color of a corpse's skin, and it also begins to grow like a wart.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And according to those similarities, they are either gray or wet, and many of them have colors as I described in the section on dislocation.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when coming to the treatment of our method that you bleed and first examine all the instruments called "entombedosors", according to their shape, which comes after the one used by the surgeon who precedes us (the following instrument).
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of investigating our abscesses is that you must keep them moist longer than when you empty them in the abscess, and turn your tools gently several times until you know whether they have pierced through, and this should be according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then take out the "entombedosor," and make sure it has gone all the way through (the word 'said' likely represents an archaic form of 'goes').
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If it contracts and has a corresponding color like I have described for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And after the "entombedosor" has caused contraction, you will know that it is swollen, and then cut diagonally with pincers, and scour lightly each part and bind with a sling as long as you are going to take out the treatment cleanly;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot extract it healthily, then take it apart so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing is left behind, he returns to us many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if he lingers a little while without complaint, then it treats the wound with some corrosive medicines, and binds up the wound, and places soothing substances at the incision, and cares for other treatments until he is cured.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if he returns to us greatly, then we prick his two lips on the wound, and treat him with that which agitates the blood.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is against it or something else when you hurry and apply a broiled lump of vitriol to its opening, and let it lie for two years or three, until the wound heals, and then return to cover that which has been lingering.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the contrivances of dislocating instruments, and there are three kinds: large and slender, and also three called "albaret", and one called "breb", and there are three others: large, slender, and small, in order to search for abscesses.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles used to catch witches, and made of citrus wood, iron, or silver, and move as those that are yellow, but they are more experienced in searching for abscess cavities.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three kinds: large, slender, and small, according to the size of the wound's depth.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the needles are many in their resemblance, just as you see here: large, slender, and small; and there are also those with two abscess cavities of three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And there are needles with three abscess cavities, and they are also of three kinds; and there are needles with three abscess cavities, and single-cavity needles, and these are necessary in their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these has two edges to it, and there are some with which one does not cut at all but only scratches them for this reason: they do not reach the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these dislocating instruments are returned to masters by mail so that the patient does not show any signs on the surface of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And they have three kinds: large, slender, and small, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And they are not used except in the vein or artery, like legs, arms, breasts, and lungs, and similar instruments.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And there has never been made another small instrument like this for scraping abscess cavities according to this form, in which it is drawn out blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And they have never been placed on the healthy vein or artery according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes women's breasts swell up when they begin to become infected, and appear like a woman's breast.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And they are swollen and they need to be healed according to this form:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing salve stuffed in cloth, then bind together the two corners of the wound with medicine, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the swelling increases downward, and is distorted in size like what happens to women when they have twin pregnancies above their ribs through numerous similar openings.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Because one holds the other at the end of each and so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line .b. up to the line .g. (Note: The numerical values represented by ".b" and ".g" are placeholders for actual measurements or positions within a diagram not provided here.)
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin in between the two corners of the wound and remove the fat, and prepare what we have mentioned about dressing and powders, and that which is necessary for treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient's wounds do not rest, or due to the drainage of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with soaked cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it bleed until the remaining tissue and fat are removed, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	from abscesses on arrows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that arise on the arrows are methods of hard tubercles or contain moisture. (Note: The text is describing how some abscesses formed from arrows may look like hard lumps and be associated with moisture.)
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture therefore require that they are cut according to this shape from the line b up to the line .g (Note: The text refers to a specific procedure for treating abscesses containing moisture, following a certain pattern or diagram starting at point ".b" and ending at point ".g").
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the blood in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with plenty of soaked cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an ointment appropriate until healed. (Note: This sentence describes a post-drainage procedure involving the use of cotton to aid in the healing process after treating an abscess.)
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of similar shapes to tumors, and if they form cracks like those in tumors, and if there is draining blood from them, then prepare a caustic instrument as we have mentioned before. (Note: The text describes using a caustic cautery for treating abscesses that resemble tumor-like conditions with draining.)
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the treatment of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is obstructed and its skin is sewn above it, as often occurs with abscesses in this condition, then blood also flows freely from both sides. (Note: This sentence explains what happens when an artery has been obstructed and treated by surgical intervention, leading to a condition where blood can flow through the affected area.)
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if there is such that it occurs on an artery, then these abscesses are formed along it. (Note: This sentence describes a scenario where abscesses form in relation to the condition of an artery.)
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you see that it is outwardly displaced, and when it occurs on the vein, then healing dressings are applied to it. (Note: This statement indicates a treatment approach for conditions where there'oce neurological condition described in Latin.)
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is madness to strike this incision, and immediately when he is under the slabs and stones and columns and in many other places, and it is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is now necessary to apply the treatment of iron, and those who are at risk must also do so, and in those with dilated arteries, they make the skin stretched long.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the thighs, and continuously loosen the arteries, until they are exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then place one here in the thighs, and pierce it on the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread, as I have instructed you regarding the extraction of two arteries that are in the temple;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point the space between the two knots of an intermeshing device so that it does not move, and loosen the incision accordingly;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that causes bloodletting, until the knot tightens;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat that which is bloody coming out so that it becomes clean;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the incision is in the thigh vein, it must be that you wipe your hand on what you use to make the incision throughout the skin;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then place the needle in the space that you hold between your fingers and pierce it, and tie it with one double string so that you can remove it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then bind the incision, as I have told you, or the knot of one part with two parts of the same string;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the string will be strong enough, then bend another needle at all four threads through the entire incision of the first needle, and bind the strings in three places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then bind the incision as much as it continues to bleed, and bind the excess bleeding and leave that which has been bound;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cover it with one sheet of linen and oil, and administer the treatments for wounds and bloodletting until it heals;
des apostemes des ners	incision of the arteries.
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also come incision in the arteries and veins, when they are torn, or too much work and resembling things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens often with shoulder pads and straps and in all their places where there are joints, and it is a painful wound, and its color seems like the color of a bruise, and there are various positions of pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when we stretch it out, if the patient feels great pain, and is not in the form of a bruise but rather deep within.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it remains silent from all parts, and does not move forward or backward, nor upwards or downwards, and those in the joints do not need to be covered with iron; by chance they undergo contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those who are at the head or forehead make a wound in the sublingual space (sublingual area).
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If his abscess is small, if you have some forceps, and you operate on its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, if you suspend the bandage to the onychium (nail), and scrape it off, then treat the bone and close the wound with stitches, and do so until healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large bags hanging down (this translation may not exactly match the original intent, but it seems to describe something related to medical treatment). The phrase likely refers to abscesses that are being treated with a technique involving suspended bandages as described in previous lines. However, this specific fragment is quite ambiguous without more context from the text and could be interpreted in several ways depending on medieval medical practices or materials used at the time.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Never occurs in the abdomen and anywhere else than the umbilicus (belly button), and it is a disease called "fungus" by the appearance of abscesses, and its root is subtle, and the wound large or small.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I see .i. home who had .ij. or abdomen that were more like funguses than anything else, and they had no difference, and were white, with a fine root, and were split apart, and immediately there was moisture coming out of them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	Iij. Etc.: et leu quatercei. Li vices duces: ceur desmeil (infernall lis encoxie aroit, siemene ofte, les pee: leu :iij:iij: iewre meniere dechief lacte :xxvraies xenefie andee cippe :vce.Ij.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the cupping bowl is large, and it is in your presence that the fire caustery should be. For at the pestle there often come many great discharges of blood, and if it does not wait for you, then quickly comes the caustery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient agitated and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thin wire, and let it remain in the articulation as we have described, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then the restraint, and continue to stretch the thin wire as much as it covers the joint, and check by its sensation of work; if the roots are large, fear not to strike in that area immediately for the abdomen, but do well to strike in most places.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize it so that it does not recoil; then treat the wound and ensure you do not strike the joint with a discolored, weak feeling, and poorly healing nature.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an incising that has been embellished, and I will come for the treatment of this ulcer afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When he cries out in pain;
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the crying originates from a wound or fissure caused by cauterization, or in his belly and at various body parts as it occurs in other cases, or blood that comes out of veins or arteries according to what is presented, or visceral issues;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it's due to the fissure and the release of blood, then the appearance of the incision resembles that of a wound with similar characteristics; it is lightly felt in terms of pain, but presents various issues at different locations.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse; when pressure is applied on its sides, it rebounds and returns, and possibly swells at the entrance of the bathing area and requires substantial effort for treatment.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to moisture, it is a light issue that appears well when pressure is applied with your hand without restraint; but if caused by blood, and presents large and tough signs in the incision, and is sutured according to an amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Anderementes li tas enchantere de la peccore deffors duel de la pice. Leu en Ipsumire: "
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is required that you leave the treatment. For he has doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is in the intestine or the bowel, it is required that you command the patient to bleed their flank, and then extend them lengthwise; after which they should draw blood from all parts of the abdomen.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	and then he commands you to lie sober between your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then proceed to the vein that you have indicated throughout the entire abdomen.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then it is part of the abscess above all the large intestines.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind him with a strong rope or a tightly woven silk cord firmly, and let us pull the rope.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then work on the abscess stretched over the rope, and let your hand be an indicator, and pull the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you pull the rope twice, it will loosen up, and push the intestines back into the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you pull the bowel, it will take the inflammation, and remove excess fluid.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein goes against you, or the vein, if it moves beautifully inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and push forward with two threads, and pull back the needles through what you have done in crossing that you think was piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal itself as much as possible, and check for death by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you manage it with subtlety and fear of the patient's condition, then proceed to treat what it requires, and examine the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and draw out the blood that you pull it out, then heal the vein, si se il covient.
dou chancre	Of fire cautery commands the Moor to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, he restrains them so they do not move until they come forth.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have previously discussed the similarities of scars and how one should treat them with medicine, and we also commented on the care for fire cautery; let us now consider a chancre that penetrates deep into marrow, great caution in its treatment is required, as they say ancient physicians would extract it if found in the flesh like scars, or in joints, or other similar marks, and must be entirely removed at the onset of its appearance; when large and old, there is no need to approach them, as I have never seen anyone heal from them before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The actions, when the malady is in its initial stage and can be extracted as we have mentioned, involve never purging a black cold sore to make it better; if it shows signs of fullness, then cleanse it thoroughly after performing the procedure; remove any dead tissue from the site for this operation; trim all surrounding nails or chancres and pluck the hair from everywhere around without leaving anything behind; let the flesh heal completely and press well with your hand or something else on the wound. If blood returns while cauterizing, continue until it is no longer bleeding; then treat further as needed until it has fully recovered.
de ydropisie	Dropsy refers to an excessive accumulation of fluid in the body's tissues, causing swelling and pain. Historically, dropsy was considered one of the four great humors (alongside black bile, yellow bile, and phlegm) that could disturb the body's balance and lead to illness, as described by ancient physicians like Galen in medieval medical treatises. Treatment for dropsy during this period involved various methods such as bleeding, purging, or using medicinal herbs believed to help restore humoral balance. However, these practices are not supported by modern medicine and can be considered outdated.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	desse cure pour les choses.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Believe the patient lying with his hands under your feet, and the ministers press the belly outward pointing the fire to the lowest part of this piece; And take the spatula-shaped osteoplastic: It is divided into two parts by a point, and not at all inserted so that it can come near the intestines when it is pierced.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then observe the hernia is directed towards the intestines: it is required that you pierce them from within the belly at intervals of three fingers below the point; and if the hernia is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly at intervals of three fingers; and if it's because of a cyst, then do so on the right side, and there is no need for pain in the area where superfluous fluids run down into the weaker one.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce through the entire hide with this instrument, and bind, and believe your hand to all of the spatula-shaped osteoplasty between the hide and serous cavity as much as a finger'ni. 1/3 inch; then penetrate it until it becomes eight times its length, and that is how the instrument appears thin like a quill, and from one part .ii. inches; and ii. parts on one side of this piece, and three inches, and iii.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	: "celevesin. Comment (n'scape. oun: a:esurge àgerre carriesseure: leve itentire unretrightener :cumbre: The :faire voutra (aute, andervoir. Afrom:
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what those dispositions of the virtue of a malady mean, and their points; then take the instrument and retain the heat, and it is now retained by the knight who goes down below the entrance which is under the sheath, as I have spoken before, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and withdraw some little quantity of heat.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	every day and do not let the fever worsen even if it lasts but for a little while; and if you doubt about the malady, and administer much heat, then the cure of embalming or sablon heats up quickly, and by many sweats or baths and in sunlight, and the treatment with drying medicines until the patient is well again, and cauterize on the stomach, on the liver, and on the spleen after removing the heat.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the embalming of the arrow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	There has never been an infant born with a large or unlocated arrow in the vein, or even if it is small and not at its usual place. It must be detected immediately by examining each spinal nerve very carefully according to this form: then put a little thin clove of wood there, and tie and hold it for three years or four years, as long as he wishes to urinate; and then release it; and in the end, there may never have been any need, because the urine that comes out does not leave the wound open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	For those with a small arrowhead in the vein, if you place two thin cloves of wood there as we have mentioned before, it will swell up. Those who do not have the arrowhead within their veins cannot urinate properly because no one is born with an arrowhead at the top of the vertebrae; thus they cannot lift their spine high enough for the material to reach the marrow area, which results in a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of this treatment is that it causes the malady to lie down on its back, with the arrowhead located at the top of the vertebrae and as small as a penny's width; so the arrowhead stays in place while the blood flows freely around it, which is what must happen. It is important not to let any spleen discoloration occur if it happens frequently; if there is a splintering of the bone where the needle was inserted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	boils on the vein or arteries
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these albathe appear in the vein, and it is a disfiguring sign; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; it requires that you examine one of them with delicate precision, and treat and massage all over, then apply Egyptian liniment bandage to heal it until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the albathe is malignant, with black color and discharging, it requires that you prepare a cautery. When you have coated it, and if the albathe is in the side of the vein, and part of it lies within the nail bed and part on the side, then you must remove the albathe which is inside first; and when it is healed, then curing it together does not ensure that the patient's symptoms related to the vein will be resolved, as blackness and corruption appear in its vein and where; hence it requires cleaning everything that is blackened and decomposed, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from grenade skins peeled off several times, then cure with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the blood comes to the point, you must prepare a lunar cautery according to this method: The lunar cauteries aid in these two situations: at the discharge of blood and corruption; and when the vein'its patient is decomposed and retracted, it requires that you cut or insert into the vein a tube made of wood, and make him urinate his painful symptoms among them; and when the hair on the head of the vein has been removed at its tip which usually occurs in those who have not been circumcised, either for injury or abscess incision, it requires that you scrape this instrument with shorn blades until they are loosened from their place, and release all parts of the vein.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a difficult matter of designing this case, you must scrape nothing on the head of the vein and the nail bed; then suture beautifully between them with a thin linen moistened with cold water so that it does not protrude in front.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not painful compared to other wounds; in any case, whenever we do this work of our own free will, and especially for children, it is the best deed and the safest way to salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children in law because they did not practice it at all and we have only what we have learned through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I wish the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision, and with one stick; so that it would break their skin, and perhaps they will stay above them and delay below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	leu theent derriere la lignage anatomie citertains dite.iij. Achele aimer ixime ofterpaintedeffer entendeur.g,ratherescalme'n'er.iureous.jacquerreveilunanumorlaterainvolvescribe. ndirectly andire:comptractures. Forthcomportion.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	sse and itafe:sacre itchere to let3en:10:seslore, but :squele (httpsare,il acheur;re le faitarme presse, sofaire.n’nacques etchape coudre. Iise
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	When you press your hand and cut it into one whole ten; but the child's finger must be well set inside his skin; and make him do the first operation in such a way that he thinks the child understands, if he listens, that you are not just binding the thread around the limb, but forcing it to behave in all ways possible.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it straight in your hands and lift the forces between your hands or on top of your thighs that the child does not see them nor any animals; then blow into the vein and raise it so high until the child's vein is visible; then clean well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the puncture site with a double thread, then tie every .i. piece to another in alternating places; and give life between the second tying by touching the pouch and indicating the direction of the arrow, and separate between these two bindings quickly and raise the tip above the child's heart.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood trickle a little and a little because it is good; and put powder on top of the powder layer an iron nail glued with half a moistened egg cooked without salt, roasted in honey-soaked oil, and leave it for another day, and cure it with other cures as long as it remains healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The formation of forces during cleaning is as follows: the two fingers are held tight and straightened out, just like the thumb.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the molding occurs when cutting densely inside the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend your thumb to make the incision, so that the cut makes an indentation; and hold it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then use pliers and grasp it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it has passed three years and what is under the vein has inflamed, then let him leave until the thorns are soothed, and scrape lightly; as long as you pull, and keep away from the part of the vein, this will not harm nor cause injury to it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the vein of conglomerate wounds that we have said or dealt with powders, and if it is pulled beyond measure, and goes upwards, it does not harm; cure it as we have said, so long as it remains healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from the operation on a piercing, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things that we have said in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not expelled and you see that there is retention in the piercing which is at the base of the bladder, it requires that the malaises be pressed on their genitals; and place his hands on his back, stretch out his abdomen from above the back part, and constrain him as much as possible so that the urine will come out. And finally forcefully press the urethra to express the piercing upwards, for it is then released (urine).
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	apele sanz lege. cei theoritgustre tote leuce theca. Leude.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way to collect urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the head with a little piece of wool or cloth, and insert the heads of both threads into the syringe; and remove any excess linen and push the heads of the threads up to the head of the syringe, then oint the syringe with oil or fat or almond oil, and let the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moistened olive oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then slowly insert the syringe into the vein, until it reaches the root of the vein, then double the vein above the wound; then insert the syringe before the bladder and feel the patient's urine coming to the empty space there, which is not done according to this order because if you lead where it goes is twisted. Then let the thread be wrapped in a little linen, and the urine follows the linen, then extract the urine, and correct the urine;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and align the patient's pain points.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or sanguine comes into the bladder, there is accumulation of phlegm, and you see it boiling away with waters and medicines, applied to all instruments called "clasp-knife", which has this shape.
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the bladder leaks due to moisture so that the medicine covers such a way as to cover well the vein without adding more, and push out when the time comes.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines in the bladder, place the chief cauterizing tool into the moisture and draw it out to the surface; if you draw the moisture into the catheter, then push strongly with the trainer there; if the moisture enters through this way, it will now reach the bladder, whereby the patient's pain points will be felt.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And it is the subtle form of the clyster used to wash the bladder: this consists in...
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	.ié:ls :otrer viences. ixent sié:en lex-sans les plaince de choses xain ciens degrief itse desin leisrele xile al theurge en latinxide ofxede, ajustice tounite dextern ices laixtrains ofxide. I'ur: "Iacresculi:
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an i. circle, and pierce it roundly inward; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a dye, and place therein whatsoever ointment and moisture and water you see fit, and tie it with the instrument, and do so as you have done for the bladder when pressing with your hand until the moisture runs from the bladder.
de la piere	Into the wound
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	In the division of surgical techniques, and wound extraction in combination with medicines; I have said about the difference between open-jointed arrows, and all signs, and on which type of incision one must work in terms of size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will explain it clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it's a sign that the water leakage from the bladder seems to be watery in its subtlety; and he hurts his hand deeply, and quite swollen his leg, and he has suffered many times, and then inflammation follows; and there are many such incidents. It is light recovery for children until they reach 3 years old, and it's very grievous in the elderly, and it corresponds to those who are between middle age and old age; and care is lighter for those with a large wound than for those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient thoroughly by catheterization, because fluid can accumulate in any part of the intestines; for it has never been found obstructing the passage.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient' Written as an instruction:
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the incision in your abdomen, immediately rise from the position on it. And if it does not hurt when touched with pressure at all points, indicate to yourself by pressing your left index finger; and if the patient is a child, or his pain returns, or his condition becomes complete; then place it firmly in its foundation, and feel the wound, and where you perceive on your touch, press down forcefully.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	La petite. Est-il à l’olte: Leu bien apres quinne ilespecialy theu espremerde incoitmes of it isoacute :gothic :theorice. Hereof, and theorex:surname thewomaniure aoutilites:caurle la mainte le:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And makes between this that is between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of moisture; and let it be placed above the wound, and you must either place it on the foundation or directly on it, and make its width so that it will be wide enough for later use, but not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance the plate is placed either on the foundation or directly on it so that it springs with work; and you know whether there is a joint or angles and margins: if it has grooves to extract from; and when placed in position, they resemble a grain, and rounded, where the exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Since it has angles and margins, make the width larger; and if it does not spring, you must stretch under the pincers that are as strong as a chief chisel to force out the wound so it doesn't get obstructed; or place one of those instruments underneath it. If you cannot insert into such, then enlarge its hole slightly, and if there is no bone devoid of cartilage, straighten it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one wound, first place the largest at the base of the bladder, then press it down, then strike it forcefully, and then handle any smaller ones that are present. If they are very large, you must cover them with silk and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out again so that his hair cannot be sewn together; but in all cases try to remove the tissue forcefully using pincers or chisels, until you take it apart piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and the tightening, and cover it with a moist cloth made of linen or cotton dipped in oil or wine, or linen soaked in rose water or cold water to calm the abscess; then wash the patient over his collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage until tomorrow.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the bandage, if it has done well in oil and water, then wash the patient with limewater and borax solution until he is healthy again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the abscess appears in the wound and congestion of blood in the bladder, it is retained urine that flows partly with the urine: therefore thrust your work into the wound, and remove the clotted blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and cause inflammation.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with aloe and silk and silk bandages in all ways you know until it is healthy again; and ensure that all urine collected while curing him be tied to his thighs and gathered around the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the wound is small and it is made with a rod of wood, and hammered down; then perform this treatment that I have said before, cut many times at this place. I have already proven in such cases.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Three angles or joints formed of leu leu andirree leu laissames, as on neuf. ce que li pense lesurine of leu deinjourne : leu de cestron l'encox. Jejurinecture toire ail leu:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	nare, sofaire. The third aye and theit, itte.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take one of his filaments from the wound and another above it, then make the vein at the place where the two lines are, and draw out the blood there, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it so that it becomes sound again.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's wound.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that an opening occurs in a woman's womb, and if it does happen, then it is considered a grievous matter, and for the following three reasons: firstly, by chance, the woman may become unmarried; secondly, there are no well-known women who can open themselves willingly, especially when they are of noble birth.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that by chance one may not find a woman skilled in this art; and the fourth way is that the womb of a woman is more perforated than the man'ayer it requires greater depth, which causes great fear for her.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if such necessity arises that you need to entrust a well-known woman, and for those things of the testament, unless there is an expert noblewoman who can perform it or someone skilled in women's healthcare, or a woman who understands at least part of this art, then command her to do what you command from the investigation of the womb.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And watch very well if the woman is virgin: then it becomes necessary to bind her waistband or foundation and examine the womb; but if she performs the act, she must restrain herself in that area, and I recommend that she pushes with her left hand on the formed bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she performs the act, it becomes necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to near the root of the thighs, so as to feel the womb in that area where it appears; and do not move her waistband up or down on the root of the thigh against the middle. Be the first small incision made there, and then she moves her waistband away from the womb or towards it.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then make the wound in the incision, if you feel the womb at that point enough so that the piercing can be removed from it; and know there are many types of pliers: small ones and large ones, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those which have prongs. See the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the woman does not hold on her own, then apply white vitriol and put your finger there for an hour until the wound is sealed; then return to your work, so that the piercing remains open, and use the instruments I have told you about in extracting a piercing from men to assist you in carrying out this task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the woman does not hold on her own and it is an artery that was pierced, then put powder on the wound and strips of linen and bandages, and do not repeat this procedure, let the piercing stay, so that a malady may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	savre it isis:vrai
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia loose
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Collected from moisture or white fat that is within the wall of the cavity, which contains the inner fluid, and they are called "white fat", and it is never properly in the lining of the cavity unless it is considered another thing; and it consists of skin between the white fat we have mentioned, and this does not occur often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this substance is due to a weakness that draws in fluid, and it expands that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it never comes from striking the fluid, and this white fat has many colors: or it is a reddish yellow, or without red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs of knowing this assembly, for if it is the white fat we have mentioned, then it includes abscesses, that is quite long like a lump, and does not open up fluids, because it has moisture throughout its entirety.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in the cavity's own lining, then these abscesses include a part of the inner fluid, and for this reason we consider it as something else.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the white fat is between the skin of the fluids and the white fat we have mentioned, it feels well; therefore, when you know the color of this moisture throughout the entirety of its distribution, from where it originates to where it goes, then its shape appears as follows.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Since that is after the introduction point, judge what is in there.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cauterize with iron, it is required that the maladies are healed according to possibility and the fullness of its heart; then they are pressed down on their backs, a little height above something, and put many layers of bandages over them.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then they lie on their left side, and command the minister to lie on the right side, and extend the rod over one of the two places where the inner fluids are kept.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the syringe and extract the skin of the fluids until near the penis, and make a straight cut through the white fat around it, and scrape gently according to possibility.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white fat plainly with water in one large hole, and extract all the fluid, and then put onions over it, and make the white fat rise above; do not touch the inner fluids, but only the white fat itself. Cut carefully underneits his side without cutting into him too much, so that if you cut badly it may return the fluid to him.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the fluid jumps up for your work on the white fat; then gather all of inner fluids in a lacis.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the upper corrupt with another illness, it must be that you bind the limbs which are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then pluck the worm from all the suspended limbs, and extract the wound, and cure as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the blood is assembled in two parts together, you know that they are two branches; take hold of the other part as you have done with the first one, then suck the fluid from the wound and place a damp linen soaked in rose oil on the injury.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And lay another piece of damp linen soaked in wine and oil on the two branches, and place it above the wound, covering everything according to this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths and pieces of linen shredded according to this manner and assemble them in the belt loops on the breeches, with one piece starting from the foundation up to the backside, and the other covering the groin area; and another two parts above the armpits, and they are all gathered into a loop on the breastplate.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never should this rod of fire be used on the skin of iron size, and you must use a slender cautery knife, and remove the skin from the wounds, as we have said, so that the white substance which contains blood is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	laissiin leu coinsent. Laure de: lescesaure ea: le: desec: entor in theoure.cox ions ouls of it's: itesle, to theurs (2000source celtic:entirely fromures
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And the cup in all ways that you can, until you master everything; and keep fire away from the face; and know this work is more safe; and avoid stagnation of blood and wounds caused by cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything contradicts you, or incision or blood stasis of any kind, treat what is contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this work because of its horrors, prepare a small hole as I told you, so that when you are sure about our meanings, it will be possible to dislocate such a thing.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Let the patient be seated on a raised seat; then make the incision in the part of the body surrounded by a wide space, and pierce deep into both sides with long sticks; and let the holes be large enough so that all the blood flow.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remaining blood flow, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the wound does not allow blood to come out of its mouth (the opening), it is necessary that you insert a pin or instrument used for draining fluid from abscesses as described before; and slightly expand the wound, and observe whether the blood returns, and after about two months or sooner depending on progress, when it has sufficiently healed, then this will be a good time for the patient to resume normal life.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the incision in the abscesses
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	You see that in this part of this operation there are many disadvantages because I think it is best left as it was.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the workings and appearances of the incision.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Here I say that many incisions come or go, and we mainly deal with them; and this happens quite often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by excessive bitterness and fluid that spreads incisions, or by percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and is the color of the incision according to the color of the artery; it does not involve pain, and it is a serious incision.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And perhaps some incisions are torn and rough due to fear or pain, with a purplish hue, and it rarely comes from our arteries, or the swelling of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it comes from our arteries, if it is caused by the position of the incision when pressed.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and does not require that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That made from the swelling of veins is caused by its position with the expressing of two pressing.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and may well make a cut at this shape, and on the others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And you must take care of the quality of the incisions, then they are placed on top, and covered with white paste, releasing the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already saturated with these needs, then it must be that you apply the paste and cover.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is in the middle of the paste or within the vessels, then it must be that you release all those attached, and cover them entirely.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the formation of the vein is behind it or undernee, then you must cover the whole thing and extract the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, you should dress the wound with clean linen soaked in rose oil and wine, then attend to other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the incision of veins
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	It is one such incisions wrapped with an appearance similar to an umbilical cord, with the softening of veins.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	And if it hurts the maladies when he moves it;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is just as important as this one before it.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and therefore we tell you the work, according to the way they did so.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	s :rofaitures eulx malice dein inostructure d'affect, illois:sous les ounceil theore in chief. Injest develaunle of itoastaire le terme.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	To the entire surface around the vein close to the neck, and the shoulders of the masters, and extend them uniformly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut deeply into the sinew, wherever there is a thorn in the flesh, as long as it remains exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape out each area as we have said in removing arteries that are located in temple regions;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert an awl or one with a double thread, and bind it at the first point where the vein has entered, and bind it again to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then proceed immediately along the length of the cord, and remove the damp ones;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as we have done with others or by making incisions, if no veins are being obstructed by any of the cuts.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this there is no ill consequence, and if any veins are found within all the sinews, it must be drained from each sinew.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	but it does not lose its rhythm due to the incision of the sinews and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	sufinchecthexapriel,antimente:eagnevity isignes:ddevociteilifere:nove it'isme iewreviable bertifreves  :<ngerme thatcelle.give yields. The tures decept he ieuctionscopeuricheliseure, hevelagreche:xaiverrairexaillexinauxxenture, iactions.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The treatment of this joint is by the cutting that comes from it or its extension to the belly in the part of the grills, because then the intestines descend along that path to one of the branches.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this route is either from the suction or its extension, and they come in these .ij. manners due to various causes: by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting a burden, and similarly so too.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is from the suction of this joint are that they happen infrequently and rarely, over a long period, and do not suddenly appear.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses extend towards the bone up to there because the suction presses the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is from the suction of this joint are that they bring about sudden onset pain at the beginning, and various appearances on the skin nearby, due to the issue of the intestines and its discharge into the bone adjacent to the area being suctioned.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there has never been a case of this joint being with the intestines, and it is held back, and causes great pain to the patient first when compressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cauteries for fear, because then they will avoid escaping.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of the treatment is that you command or order the patient to move his intestines inside during the wound repair if he can return.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then suddenly sucked up by its neck between your hands, and gently hold it.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then the key above, and cut all the skin of the two branches long.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert under your legs one end according to what you know how to do for opening the wound, and make such that it can be pulled out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the suction that is under the skin of the branches, so that the white suction covers all parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then insert your guide in such a way that it teaches the branch, which is between the white suction under the skin of the abdomen and between the second suction.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then that which is behind the abdomen, and between the second suction. And pull it to your right hand inside the joint of the branches, and the white suction in front of your left hand, and lift the abdomen all around the suction towards the body.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and see if it has the intestines wrapped in white suction or firmly, and if you do not find anything, let it go into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	sié:icel iiij ofere entendement demein leesme l'once leccles dele ofener in thejac. ices:eich.vrai :nentities aces thele, The Frenchcaut.iijfaire enmeant. Howire jargue theil :interpreyssenter fromage. Theissuel. Itale.iij. Ipsede. Jounger.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then they join them together in the shape of a cross, and bind it with strong twine, which we have said is inside the skin of the joints, by a tight thread of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then they wrap the shoulders of the patient's limbs, and bind them with strong twine in a pattern of two parts each, so that no one can push into them while the joint is open.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And mainly sets the twine according to the first one long by two parts, and after these two-part twines they leave a wide band that is inside the skin of the joints, covering it greatly.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after that follows the rest according to the shape it bears; then they cover in the part which is inside the skin of the joints, without pressing too much and pulling it, as we have said earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then they apply a warm linen in oil, and treat the twine that we have mentioned before.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes they cauterize the white band inside the skin of the joints after the incision, due to doubt or fear of bleeding out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	Because this happens many times, and they leave the twine until it breaks; and if it delays breaking, they raise it with hot water as we have mentioned before, until it breaks.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then they treat the wound further until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to perform treatment with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is made so like the assembly of threads wrapped around each other, in such a manner as to bind the limbs after cutting them off with severe force.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then they coat it with oil and treat the wound that was done to him, as we have said until the limbs are healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	There has never been such a rupture of the abdominal contents, as we have said before, and they open it up; and if some are torn from their entrails, that is little harm done, and reattach them all.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And in any case if it lingers too long on this point, they believe the wound or ulcer, as long as the entrails are torn.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens with the extension of that band inside the abdomen, as we have said, because it is stretched, and then becomes softened and raised them upwards and opened them.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	ssecreatime asto
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And it is that the patient's great pain lies between his two hands, then fill the joint of dislocation with a thick band according to three fingers in size.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the sinew that is under the skin where it lies, and take the thread and apply it to the visible sinew.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press on the letter formed in the abdomen, and count out the two visible sinews above the thread's tip, and count both of them.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the tip of the thread, and do not cover the sinew nor extend the other parts, as I have shown you in the treatment of uncoiling the bowels.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat it with wound care. And when you remove the threads, if the mouth flaps and heal the wound, as long as it remains sound.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is constricted and has no appearance in the dislocation routine, and the cautery sticks to this point, and further away from healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the flesh of the joints.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the flesh of the joints is softened in some people, because those who are inside are softened, and it looks like milk; and it is necessary to cure when one sees a sick patient lying on his back, and he takes hold of the softened skin above natural skin; then assemble two or three layers around it, and if you see excessive softening, first reduce it to two or three layers firmly; then sew between the layers, and treat it as with other wounds, so long as it remains sound, and tie the thread.
dou chastrement	in cauterization.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the punishment that is permitted by our law, and because I would like to not mention it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: one is that you answer when asked about the punishment, and how you administer it; and the other, because we often had to use physical discipline on various animals to help us, such as a goat or sheep, deer, etc. So I say that this form of punishment is carried out according to these two methods: either by attraction, or by incision. For the method of attraction, you place the animal in hot water until its joints are soft and while; then pinch it with your hand as much as possible until it heals; for the taming method: make sure that you muzzle the animal's skin on your left hand, tie the suspension strap, and loop each cord around eight times when they have been thoroughly flayed; and this way of disciplining is different from attraction, because by atraction there may be a chance for some joint fibers or sub-fibers to remain under the skin on the legs, and this method of punishment.
des hermofrodites	in hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	inyeptie: leu demeans, ainses,et cestant ditz: laisses as messe, et siens en cas touns escrevet. Italians, estil'esme des gains: les mein theurge lait English: itils on theurs:
de la tentigene	:elication of thecaesar lelucateurs a l’sainte leveur (prezent. Whatilunanfe:esceafarre, ilice. Ispiris'sage. Iliapoin-goneime.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tendin has been attached to the natural part until it is too hideous to see; and some women have had it as much like a hand, and that is the cure. It must be that you draw away the superfluous tendon from your hand or fingers lightly; and do not go too far in cutting, lest blood does not stop, then the treatment of another treatment until he is sound; and for another condition where it protrudes out of the mouth of a murel, and empties itself, and appears as if according to the likeness of a cow, and because of this they called it "cow disease" (kowe). It must be that you remove it, as we have said about tendin, and cure it until it is sound.
de erratique	This word "erratique" appears to be in French and means "erratic" when translated literally into English. However, if this is a part of an Old French medical text with specific terminology or context, it may have a specialized meaning related to the subject matter discussed. Without additional information about its usage within the historical document, providing a precise translation or interpretation isn't feasible in this format.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic conditions are those where the woman's nature is not clearly understood, or the hernia is small; and it may be congenital or caused by an illness that has occurred; or it could result from a slipped stitch, subtil strings, or other similar factors, which form in the groin, either on the sides, underneath, inside, or wherever there might be; and these conditions are involved in conception, childbirth, and sometimes they lead to flowers having them. Based on the rules of dressing, one must gather two indicators, place them over the woman's back with her legs spread out; then form the threads until the subtle string is fully sutured by the slipped stitches, and apply linen bandages soaked in oil to the wound, and keep applying it every day as long as needed. If the subtle string is hard and sharp, you must copy a similar pattern resembling a sprig of myrtle leaves for treatment. If the slipped stitch has been present since birth, spread it out at the side and suture; and with various medicines containing blood from dragons or incense mixed together, cover a large linen cloth so that the wound cannot heal, and then treat it for a long time, and bind it with dry linen bandages. And when such a hernia occurs in the groin area, one must follow this method of treatment; but if there are entangled stones in the groin, no one should touch them with iron or tools. Because a stone lodged within the inguinal canal prevents any contact with iron or metal instruments.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids, also known as hemorrhoids or piles, are mentioned here to be treated by using a cloth saturated in oil and applying it around the affected area, which corresponds to the description of treatment methods that involve wrapping with linen soaked in oil. The original meaning may not be clear; however, this passage references another kind of hemorrhoids from the same era: encompme les leges, et siens.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Burns are wounds which have not been traditionally treated with caustic medicine, and when they become old, they turn into scabs; as we said in the discussion of symptoms, signs, and I will now mention those who receive treatment. I say that burns and scabs, when they appear on marble surfaces, are imperceptible to touch, so they cannot be treated with iron; however, those present at the mouth of the marble can feel them and treat them. Therefore, you must first put a woman in a cold room, then stretch her skin above pincers, and heal her roots with medicines that restrain blood flow, similar to dragon's blood and incense; afterwards, let her stand for an hour in cold water; and if the wound becomes moist again, she should sit in a decoction of sumac leaves and grenade skins, along with other things; then take flour from wheat, knead it into paste, and apply it on her back. And if she coughs up blood, that is good. If not, he will press vent syringes onto the skin and mammary glands without hurting them; then take linen cloth, soak it in juice of plantain or juniper berries with wine, and apply it to her chest. And when the abscess relaxes, treat its opening until it is healed; and those who are called "albather" turn red and have a rough appearance similar to that of scabs; and then continue treatment until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses on the marble surface
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Abscesses on the marble surfaces
de l’enfantement	iagnimeurs  :dece anatomevolvexcelleiuels iauldreuconseculleifles.cameinthecthocaragon,kete iflone.12nde
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The profession is first in understanding the natural shape of childbirth, and these signs appear when you see a woman pushing forward, and desiring to smell the armpit; therefore, you know that those children are born according to their natural shape, and arise from the head, and the second follow with them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press quickly on her abdomen so that the child comes out at once. Because when he separates from his head, the second follows him, and is marked by painful swelling due to proper molding of excesses in accordance with its nature; and this which does not come in this manner is never naturally formed. For it comes none times upon its feet, and comes forth with either legs or shoulders, and the hands, or on her abdomen, or sinks down from its neck, and is transformed by chance due to its collarbone, and other disfiguring figures; thus it is a profession that she must be skillful and subtle in these matters, and she will demonstrate all the signs as we should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out of its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with a groan, and his strength is weak; let him lie on a chair, or women hold them; then rise his nature from oil or fenugreek boiled, and pour the bath between her legs in which this small bladder has its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second layer, and coat his belly as much as the moisture is correcting the baby'inascent; and press on the woman's abdomen until the child comes out, and if it does not come out, you must clisterize the woman with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil for an hour; then make her stand up straight, and open her hands one by one. And if they do not enter forcefully, you should lay her on a chair, lift her feet high, and pile the chair onto the ground, and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate when standing up; and if his hands cannot be entered, and the child dies, you must cut his hands with the instrument shown before me. And extract the baby, and massage him gently all over.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the exit from the child on its feet: if it does not come out easily or naturally, you should carefully cut his hands with a sterile instrument shown to me beforehand; then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing. And as for the baby who has died during this process, massage him gently all over his body.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out of its feet, it is necessary to push upwards: if there are no signs or natural movements indicating birth, you should carefully cut the hands with a sterile instrument shown beforehand. Then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing. And as for the baby who has died during this process, it is necessary to massage him gently all over his body.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then press them lightly and repeatedly, until they are equal in size: if there is no natural movement indicating the birth of a baby through the feet, it is necessary to carefully cut his hands with an instrument shown beforehand. Then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing up. And as for the baby who has died during this process, massage him gently all over his body.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then press on her feet and do it lightly and repeatedly: if there are no signs or natural movements indicating the birth of a baby through the feet, it is necessary to carefully cut his hands with an instrument shown beforehand. Then pile the chair onto the ground and cleanse the woman so she does not defecate while standing up. And as for the baby who has died during this process, massage him gently all over his body.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	can he jump upwards so much as possible. And if it orders to prent in this figure: let him be done as far it is not allowed that lié sourne, and it order de l'arbre: de la mains les jusque desmeest l’amain que ains est celever, et leves defforme.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said before, then twitch only a little and keep it natural in its shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For when there is ligament damage.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not jump as we have described, then take mush of beechwood, oil from sawdust, boiled resin, and grind all in one mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply it to the skin of the woman inside and out for this anointing.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then let it sit in water down below their ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is moistened there, he makes for her a bracelet of myrrh, and puts it on her and lets it remain for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then let it sit on a seat, then force him to exhale and hold his mouth and nose, and press down lightly on the belly because he now jumps again.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the child's knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, he puts the bracelet on his hands a little and a little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then he is strapped to his neck, and presses down the legs forward, and lies down by a bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bends his hands slightly, then he pricks the palms on his stomach, and holds the knuckles there until they are set below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	les cest laissons, est malice duel aoutil enmau, ces tolves.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And let the child cry little and little; and instructs the woman to protect it so that the baby urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of the child who comes out with a hand wide open.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I command to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be brought back, then rise up the woman and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot go, then make her lie down on a bed, and straighten out her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then I will treat the mushy area that I have told you about.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and teach her how to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And let the child be according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to protect it so that the baby urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child on its neck, and spreading out its hands, and turning her face towards her mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I command that the baby tugs at his hand, then turns it little by little, and the woman pulls it gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equal in size, then place the mushy area and oil on top of it, as we have said, and command her to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And once you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and command her to protect it, and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this way for the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this manner to the second time, and pours the second measure on your little finger until the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the baby cries on its face and neck, then pour water on it so that she is not held back, and let the baby cry.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child in there as it should be, and command the woman that she does not protect the baby at all.
adonques si istra legierement.	And then move it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of twins.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times and never two or three; this is not extraordinary, and it rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are extraordinary things, and they do not live long by name.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, that they multiply, and are tormented by their own secret which is bound to moisture;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And it does not emerge naturally as all humans do, as we have said before.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it emerges with a grinding noise, in the manner as we have described, and bears the subtle bowels quickly and lightly doing whatever it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And acts as it should, moving to safety.
de plusors enfans	From many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	And are not formed in the marl or mud; they may be i, ii, iii, iv, v, vi, vii, 15, or more such forms measured by the standard size of a child.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it covers all this because, by chance, such things often happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If it acts according to what is required.
de l’enfant mort	Of the child deceased
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman of the deceased child or belly, as I have described in parting it, and no more accidents occur, then you are compelled to engage in hand work.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it requires you to know whether the woman is of sound health and hasn't had an accident or fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it requires that the woman be supported on her back, with her hands raised, and the legs lifted upward;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	re:tandecte.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then smear the mouth of a woman with wet earth and honeycomb and seed of flax, then anoint her hands with these oils and honeysuckles.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then you lightly stir the earth in her mouth, either into the joints that are movable or visible.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take care if his hair is appearing above his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you pierce the joints in her hair or at her neck or mouth or throat or under the chin or near the shoulders.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if he is suffering from pressure upon his joints, you strike and injure his neck and shoulders.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is required that he tint the joint in his right hand, and place the pain between his fingers of his left hand, and anoint all of his hands lightly, and pierce any joints in neither of these places until he wanes from the matter.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And it is the form of the joint:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then pierce against another joint, or where you have experience, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then they move equally from one side and the other to come out, so that the teeth hold them in position, as this is its form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part of it, anoint his hands with oil again, and put the oil on that part, and take out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a little bit of it, put this joint higher up and make it so that the thing falls out all at once.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return by compression:
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then it is required that you wrap a cloth around him until all falls out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then cover the joint in the foot or at the sole, and so it is required that you do in both hands, and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the shoulder of the child is large and it is stressed at the extraction or has a high assembly,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	it is required that you insert the spinal joint between your hands, make the head and extract the large one.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you use the instrument called "almidach", which comes from the practitioner who uses it.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in this manner makes the child naturally suffer great pain and injury.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then cut the bones with pincers,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if his shoulder jumps up and he restrains it there, even if it is split, as long as the moisture that comes out or leaks from it.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, then you must cut it into pieces so that it moves.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the abdomen or on the sides, it must be pierced until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if there is an empyema above his legs, then it is lightly attracted and treated quickly with the mouth of the marrow.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is in the abdomen or uterus, it must be extracted with one piece wrapped around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and making the abdomen or uterus, as long as the moisture comes out from it.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if other limbs are broken, and they remain displaced.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if he breaks his hand with the marrow, and takes it out through the mouth of the marrow.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he puts one or two pebbles in it, and pulls them out forcefully.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the marrow is removed by piercing, which was there before, it does not require further work.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	otherwise, it requires to provide moist and fatty substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the moist substances, seeing in water softeners and soothing agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the empyema is on his side, you must place it in a similar way, providing what we have mentioned about live children.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if there is no possibility, he pulls it out in pieces without leaving any part of the second layer.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, provide the moist substances we mentioned in treatments involving fluid-filled cavities.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if it is bleeding occurs, place it under cold restraints, and administer other treatments as prescribed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I observe a woman in which there is an empyema above her waist had the wound. There is a painful place, and other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long they came upon one abscess in the wound, and it swelled so that he opened it, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to call for treatment, and thought long upon the wound, which could not be bound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it on a strong magnet with great attraction, and drew out an bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was ashamed much because her abdomen had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sought the wound and treated it with handfuls of bone, so that her condition improved to its best state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and she lay there long afterward, and was thus for a few weeks without any pain.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I do not recall this chapter except that when a master performs an extraordinary act, he knows how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	twice to return her limb to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And next comes the form of great pressure, for which we have no books; and at one point it twists two parts away from their joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Always, the horns are more subtly delineated than any other restriction, and it is made of wood or brass.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and it is the mouth of that certain wood, which has a wide face, and the margin of the trees must be at least one palm and a half.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and among these members are two adjustments of this kind made in them, which close firmly to one another by a half palm or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two adjustments are placed in her mouth when turning the limbs.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, resembling more subtly and lightly, made of iron or boxwood according to the shape of the forceps.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And it should have two hooks like you see, about the length of one hand, and two wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see opening the mortise for all parts of the instrument, let it sit so that the woman with a foot on it places and adjusts the legs.
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then place the dislocations together in the mortise, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand on the instrument accordingly to how you have made the forceps evenly, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the mortise, until it makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely suited and has many similarities; and the more times it has been prepared for such work, the harder it becomes to perform it, and the higher its value due to its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not spoil the instrument that you have prepared, because their needs are not to be ignored.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage of childbirth is reached, it requires you to command the mother that she retain her placenta, and then let her cough out her condition, and restrain your hands at the mouth and in the nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	il, andrepresents thegustruction. It, itou :s: "theorlalongstheyre. I'dise in English vulgarization. Whatisue.celel,representation of theurtecte a French:
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not so, if it takes him, and makes a wound or fracture, and puts there herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, as in healing, rue, anise, chamomile, chervil, and hundred.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or boiled in water; then put a poultice or fracture on the wound, and place the other head in the mouth of the marsh.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And mold so long as the vapor rises within the marsh; then make him cough, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he jumps suddenly again.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not better, then commands the ball that her left hand should be wetted in linseed oil or honey, and then throw it into the fire.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And if she finds the second injury; and when she has found it, give her and stretch it little by little straight, so that the marsh does not hinder the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But she must move lighter to the right and left, and then throw it away, if it comes back towards her.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marsh is stiffened, as we have said, then there is the treatment of coughing and smoke from herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if she remains not of all that we have said, let you not be deceived in throwing it away.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But he who is at the mouth of the marsh, you must lay it on the woman's side, and then treat her with fourfold ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If she holds it and returns to her place, but in any case, whenever it comes back malodorously to the stomach and head, then treat the painful area.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	But now we say that smoke is useful for this cause: none of the ancient ones have tested smoke from chicory and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument to smoke the woman with the retention of flowers and the second injury is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to see as if it were a poultice, and put the subtle head underneentiche, and large feet by the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let there be smoke on embers, and mold so long as it is gone; then commence another one.
de percier lou fondement	of verifying the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	And there are children born who do not have this foundation known, but rather it has been established subtly and firmly:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	And it is commanded to the ball that she must see and avoid touching her little childrens's blood.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on a thin vein with oil and water, then the treatment of cleansing until he is clean.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that he will not reattach, then insert a small piece of wood and let his hands rest for days, and bone him when the patient wants to go to rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there are never such weldings for closing a wound or incision; it is required to cover that welding: if you care for it, as we have said about the small piece of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the foundation of the fistula
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from the foundation are inflammations, and larger than those coming nearby or within a distance of two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one or more fistulas; and when the inflammation is old, then act, and let a small warm compress or subtle blow to alleviate pain.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these persistent fistulas are known because they have either evacuation or windiness when the patient makes an excretion; and sometimes jump around in its position.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas penetrate just to the bladder and a part of the thigh; and they reach just to the hinge joints and other parts of the body.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And at this point we know the persistent fistula from its foundation; and it is not anymore:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and if you press your thumb or foundation; and insert a subtle needle of iron into the fistula when there is no twisting movement.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting movement, then insert a small piece of wood or horsehair gently until you feel the stick or hair at your location.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not lead to discharge or windiness, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	you know it does not penetrate anymore; if you hasten your healer.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent in the bladder or near the ureter, if it leaks urine; and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	:age of thegendures tote. In medieval surgean age:sesle: in thex (13ouse of itentire. Whichich. Theur. Age's. :enrolution. Allusere.Age' ⁠:
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	sone ivexent:nagrextocleurifere orfractiblevitescifferrection.t hevreins andsengraindre soinsoignexes. Iniciteicharche,waxing (ceurange.gallonseccarde 3alter ia
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these Persian fistulas there is no remedy because of work, and the vanity of people who interfere with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	And in that which is not Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And it causes great pain between your hands on his back; and the legs are bent up to their knees, and the knees are inclined towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then bind a tent of rainwater, or if there is twisting, keep it as long as you can tell where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain around the foundation, then it must be that you bind your index finger on him.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if the tent has perceived it; and whether you feel between your thumb a straw mat or sack, which tells that it is Persian.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if there is no work done on it then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	We can heal such things well, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done on it, if it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as we have said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and pour this he puts all heat into the fistula, until it bends away from its foundation; and does that number of times (either 2 or 3) as long as you know those faulty things are like the quills of an arrow.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the curing of moistened tents in pitch makes it soak until those things are soaked; then cures of binding with oil-soaked rags and soldering.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, that's good. But if there is another way to be healed, this cannot be done.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent is between, and it does not pierce through to your thumb which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of tar or sack between your thumb and the tent, then you see the fistula leading up to that cover.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the cauterizing begins at the start of the fistula, and then puts it in before the tent, and applies the cautery afterwards, until it bends to the top of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and then lets go the tent, and takes it up; then burns those faulty things that resemble a bird's feather, and does not leave any remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not come out of you, and cuts between your vein and the flesh, then cauterizes with fire or medicines.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery has two purposes: firstly, it is concerned with these closely joined things; secondly, it treats the discharge of blood and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the curing of dampened tents in pitch or in fire, until he pulls out the pieces that are blackish from the wood.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat wounds caused by sticky burns with hard charcoal, and let the medicines be dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes just at the foundation, and it is pushed away from its roots, you should pour on oil or cauterization there and ask about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and there is inflammation or swelling in that area, or it has to be pierced, if there are only small wounds of discomfort and hope, by administering one of these three treatments:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you treat it just at the root, or if there are tentative signs and heal as we first described.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And never too deeply treat the foundation itself, that you do not cover what holds the base, and carry out your actions willingly.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then heal it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance it will heal, or you move away the covered portion and the sore that is near the foundation, or by tentative signs or another pointed instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then make ready that necessary cautery which lies in the wound, as you can do it.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study how to restore the wound and delay the fistula in the forward-facing part of the foundation; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And nevertheless are fistulas in this manner; and when you puncture the tent into the fistula, it is located on the surface of the underlying tissue ("costeit dou fondement").
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	If you take a tentative to puncture it at this manner:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts one twisted wire into I, and binds the band around all the wire until it is at the tip of the abscess.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If she is Persian on the margin within that foundation, then you extract the protruding wire from it so as to tighten your thread.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And remove the tip of the wire, and bring together the two ends, and bind them to each other, and let it be one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And do not loosen the binding at all while the wire covers these points which are between two, and join them together.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make a puncture in all possible ways that you can, but if it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not need to cover the healing with the binding if it is too deep, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The foramen of the spinous vertebra from which the fistula comes out quite large and in one or two parts.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, for this reason it does not pierce what has to be pierced, as you can see in these ways.
des emorroydes	of evacuations (of blood)
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Blood evacuations are in two ways: within the foundation itself or as small and large grains like resin, and then flesh.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And if there is one or more of them, they are removed from the foundation and from the tip of that same foundation; but those which have been removed due to moisture contain very little.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And then they are either a little water or some flesh, and have the color of yellowish-orange skin;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those within the foundation, if you command that he should be confined in rooms until his foundations are well-furnished and visible again, indicating recovery from an illness or injury. The term "c’aperent li filz" suggests a restoration of normalcy to bodily functions, possibly referring to the resolution of symptoms such as swelling (lesions) that were previously obstructing visibility into the internal state of the body ("filz").
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hasten, and pull it out with pliers, or put it on your thumb, then coat the root. This instruction may relate to an emergency procedure where rapid action is required. "Le pent as tenailles" likely refers to using tools like pliers for extraction, while putting something on one's thumb suggests a manual manipulation technique in acute care. The reference to coating the root could imply post-removal treatment or protection of a wound site.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the child cannot hold them in his mucus, then they take it with an apron or cushion, or from a piece of quilted cloth;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract arrows from your body, then burn on it, and powder above any hot powders that are in the place of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if as it is said by the physician of cautery, then he treats other treatments until he is well.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the dislocations cannot be removed, then he should perform a cleansing enema on the patient with harsh and biting enemas to wash away what is underneath, so that they can come out more openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And if their symptoms are serious, and their wounds are deep underneath, then it is light treatment.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And if you prick him with your finger or use tongs, and burn them, then treat them as we have said, until he is well, and that the cut by iron does not worry him.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is meant that you should perform the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and push it into an awl, then pull the thread upwards over the awl, pierce another part with the same awl, and turn the ends of both threads around the awl.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is wide; and hold the thread tightly formed, then pull the thread, remove the awl, and do so with all others, leaving one for correcting any excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a cloth dampened with oil or wax on the foundation, and put it back in place, and instructs the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let him lie there until he vomits, and when he has done so, he cares for his burns and other treatments as long as he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	two times or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times occurs suddenly in the intestines, and by constraining its nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is meant that you should reapply a poultice or your finger's skin above it, which does not allow for moistening.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and cares for him as long as it is well if that is what it says.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be adjusted, then he must re-iron more forcefully than before, so that he remains well, and they are burnt.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treats as much as it is said;
dou fremit	there comes a trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formication is a misleading appearance before the wound, and causes much pain when touched.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And there is no thawing the ice-cold blood, and it feels like a trembling death in him all over his body, especially in the hands more than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is to take a feather of a goose or a large bird's feather, and place it on the trembling so that the purple circles around it disappear completely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand all over the feather so that you hold it tightly against the trembling and apply pressure to it, and withdraw the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it like a circle of iron or raindrop-like depending on this form, and subtly placed beneath the surface above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	However, do not let it move by itself and keep pressing it And if you see the trembling, cauterize it as it is before or with fire-cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	in the form of a washing
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	It is never done by using silver or copper enemas, or ardent heat or molten rainwater; and it is not performed with small and large compresses as they are applied to the area.)
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These instead are small ones used in the treatment of children who are frail and sorrowful; they are little. (Note: This line may discuss the use of certain tools or compresses that are suitable for treating vulnerable young patients.)
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema is small and large if it is above; or if the abdomen is tied in this manner. (Note: This line describes a particular method where an enema's size corresponds to specific bodily conditions, possibly related to obesity or other physical issues.)
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a distension or the abdomen is tied, as you see it; and the bandages are placed inside each other; and on one side of the breast .ii., there is a puncture, and on the other .i. (Note: This text suggests a technique involving applying pressure or tying to address swelling ('devesance') in the abdomen while using strategic placement of bandages.)
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and whether it is the abdomen or somewhere else that puts medicaments in a best woman's bladder or piece of parchment, and presses them all over minor punctures. (Note: This sentence seems to describe an old medical practice where medicine-filled containers are placed internally, possibly indicating treatment methods for internal conditions involving 'menus pertus', which may have been interpreted as small wounds or sores.)
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and is placed in each of these punctures. (Note: And then put each one 'ses amailles, pour les coulur du corps ains deffors deshortres:il fremit d’acabellere of the walettes auces treche en ce tounsure chapein French-septentendre toc. Ifractrevers :'rue dechief (140352efect. Ith century,
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is dense, if there is blood on the instrument in front of it with a strong thread, then enemas will be administered; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and smear the head of enema with oil or alum salt, or something similar, then pour it in quickly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the practitioner draws the enema on his two hands together until he feels them all, then extracts the enema, and lifts up the patient's legs onto the bed.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine comes out as much as possible; and if it stays overnight in total, it is even greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you perform an enema in a disease of bowel movement, and the medicine speeds up its release, it will continue as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the impacted feces are at its foundation or abscess, then even a subtle enema can be as gentle as for an infant.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle enema under which the skin is tightly held:
des plaies	and wounds (This seems to be a continuation from previous text discussing medical treatments for injuries. However, it doesn't seem to directly relate to the translation task given.)
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in our division about the treatment of wounds; or you will say about the treatments by hand and medicines, according to completion (This statement appears to be a conclusion from previous medical discussions but is not part of the direct translation task.)
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are and how they were made, and from which things they were made; (This statement is a general observation about the variety of wounds but does not require translation as it stands apart from the line-by-line English translation task.)
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made include movements of the stone, cutting with sword or hatchet, and so on (This statement provides examples of how various types of wounds might occur but is not a direct translation task.)
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or they are made according to the parts of the body where a wound is felt on the neck, or at the head, or in the legs, or abdomen, and similar limbs (This statement classifies different types of injuries based on their locations but does not require translation as it stands alone from previous text.)
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with simple head injuries, because memory of them will come to my attention (This statement suggests a methodical approach to treating various types of wounds but is not part of the direct translation task.)
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not fractured, if it is taken as an injury from stone movement or similar things, and the skin is all torn apart and the wound is large (This statement provides insight into how to approach certain types of injuries but doesn't fit directly within the translation task.)
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you have slight doubt about the abscess: if it makes the head swell first most of the blood from the wound comes out, and then healing occurs in the opposite part (This statement seems to be related to a specific medical situation involving an abscess but isn't directly relevant to the translation task.)
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And rejects the maladies of excessive wine and heavy meats (This statement seems out of context with respect to the medical treatments being discussed but speaks generally about avoiding certain dietary practices.)
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it doesn't improve, then reduce its meat intake and don't drink wine or chew tobacco (This statement advises on lifestyle changes that might aid in recovery but is not part of the original translation task.)
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply bandages to the wound as much as possible, or with oil poultices, pour soit:
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	I'sans cest iles defface ce monde.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	entail.entence meurt: entsarme andreant.entirement:escription ofmeet. Inuageinanxenture, alexander'on. Anda.comenture. Sardentif thefaire entract. A :
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, they are sewn together by a layer, as I will say about abdominal wounds, from suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is discovered in the bone and healed but holds only slightly by the ligament, then care for the wound with medicine, and restore a tough layer of leather on it.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to consume large quantities of meat like testing it by roasting and eating bread, as well as cooked turkey, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you change the skin for purulence and it does not grow on the bone, but holds the entire purulent mass together by the ligament, then heal it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery involved in the wound or vein without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then whether you remove the vessel, and if you loosen the blood clot with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if it does not benefit, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the care is light; and it's when you apply this powder so that the blood clot dissolves as well.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is: take incense for a part; blood from an animal; three parts silver, and the powder very finely ground.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply fire to the wound, and hold firmly, so that it heals well and joins all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then the lodestone is made well, and let it feel discomfort if it does not swell; for one should not use magnetism as long as it remains unhealed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never is this done alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon blood, but the arrow has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was, so that no one puts this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but with any well-digested ointments or flour of barley made from water and honey, as long as it does not heal.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of other treatments continues until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if there's a bone fracture along with the wound, and it is small, then you should use subtle pinches.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you about this after broken bones.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it's simple, if there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but whether it is in the neck or the arrowhead penetrated.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's in the neck, there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply anything restrictive, because it harms the neck and causes retraction.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And not place anything on the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold, and its continuation with the brain, which is the most elevated part of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But if the medicines are applied as with barley flour washed in gentle water and mixed with rose oil and also wetted gently in water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones from the mines in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind and let it heal with bandages until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	But if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of blood, pierce lower or remove it.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arrowhead is embedded in the flesh, and we get to bloodshed, and bleeding comes out, and it must be cauterized by the proper method.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if there is an arrow in the throat, or it pierces, and its movement must be watched so that the meat goes out.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if there is a foreign body in the throat, but do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then strengthen the limb so that it heals.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	ici cestangles les oignes du greaves.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	il mea esedurles de rienes's.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	sse: ells and theorbeutre, apei.e:nacue.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, let there be powder on top of the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if bone is in the wound and it has an abscess, as I described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound of the arrow or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's a wound from an arrow or knife, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound to see if there are signs of windedness in the patient's lungs, which I will describe later: since the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its entirety, then I will not apply powder to it in the first hour or bind it with a substance that slows down bleeding within the wound.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And withdraw from the body, and extinguy the malady.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But I will apply an attractive ointment and apply it to the wound several times a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you have no such attractive ointment, then put a lot of cotton to draw out the fluid from the moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And let the patient with malady lie down on the wound for 2 to 3 days, or more if necessary.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	And if there is no seizure, and no bad trembling in the body not related to this,
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the patient's bone positions, you will know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat him then with other remedies as long as he is healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if he cannot become well again, then see that there is an abscess; and do the treatment as it should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or more severe on the backside, then apply the treatment that should be done for such cases.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it's large in scale, apply cautery to the wound; if it's small and use powder, or if it penetrates into bone and involves fragments, then treat the wound and stop bleeding from such puncture.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they do not remain in the wound, and lightenlixte it's.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds affecting other limbs, it is judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	And a double hernia of the abdomen.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The double hernias of the abdomen are great and cause both large and small ones.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Of the great wound there is never an entrance to the intestines, nor a penetration of its contents, because it does not allow for such intrusion.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the dressing is more painful, and there has never been a case where the small wound was worse than the large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because for it is easier to pull back the intestines from, but if not pulled with increasing force.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines inflate almost immediately when they feel pain, and thus pull back more easily.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for that reason it is more serious than the other injuries, because we pull back the intestines from their place that others do not have.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you know that the treatment for the abdomen is by four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the four common dressings are in the treatment of the abdomen' cvrse.
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the dressing for other wounds of the abdomen, and the four common treatments are common among other similar injuries.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all of them are more suitable with the treatment for the abdomen, and I will say one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is affected.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and grafts are easily removed, this is by one of the four methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or by the smallness of the wound, just as we have said.
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are inflamed by pain.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And if it is cold, heat them up by that method.
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	slightly warm an sponge or one of those damp cloths only with water.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you soak in cold water siphoning and fumigating, and sprinkling.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestines until they swell.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	:t :cause ndr laisseres untractin. In theasein
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling disappearing, how much the intestines of fire or water and evil are tenderly cooked.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	Because by this it is unstable the entrance to many things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then with some effort we clean the wound using the tool that suits best in order to remove the blood clots.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first cure is to massage rather than cut;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	for we should not cut into much necessity that does not require it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it is the massage for the splitting;
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts deeply into the cavity and does not remove it fully, then there will be a change in its shape;
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is swollen and the intestines protrude;
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is reset according to its natural position;
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if it is possible because this matters;
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it is located in the part inside the abdomen ('la partie desoz lou ventre');
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it indicates that you should make the patient lie on its back ('faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos');
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and places its legs higher than its head ('et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief');
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it's located inside the abdomen ('et s’ille est en la partie desoz le ventre');
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	Internal Medicine.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	:enjourre malice texte. from theilitexplain it'sle ileslustre :meeting thexile. What: I'llisolate. This,le demane le corps :ist.froms : "it'sentence. What. Leave, incomprehillegal towoman. Itteeth (allcure theuire itesque: Theunite.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	se lite cuissussoignes:el ci12oi.niflifles iftransseurs hele veekherrevesseuriferranges
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And then it requires to provide what I have said concerning large and swollen wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	And for small wounds, that appear so.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	and you have in your hands the minister of pain who carries all the routine with his hand.
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and it is the common way for dressing wounds.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you provide an instrument or several, according to the quantity of swelling in the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave the head of the wound. I will create space with my finger and insert a sharp instrument or one that has a strong thin thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two needles in the syringe.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is inside the skin until you pierce that part.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and bring together the two sides of the syringe the four needles.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	and pull out a double thread through one of the needles.
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then assemble the two needles in contact with the wound.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then remove my finger space, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	and let it be like you have done with the first needle.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing what you know how to do with needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all the wounds are contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be various, both subtle and large.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because subtle needles cauterize the entire wound area, and large ones cannot penetrate well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason they should be varied;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it does not require us to forcefully thrust the needles into the flesh and skin.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	but they do not cause the wound before sealing it.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then use the needles so they do not disturb the sleeping patient's pain.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tentures on the needles so they may hold,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	nous à l'esle of thex itile. Itaux de:xent c’monte a laisse le feu, illapeacean, Ire parle desu. Allée.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	sse coull inchorexive. (100es andire. Iface ape. What.
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	liondexile. Theent miec<section'el masgere and it’s,recces:taille. Sox demy deatme a fudexiveuxse taucterces. iaulture.faire that canceuses
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second dressing is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And it involves assembling the shoulder joints and the shoulder sutures with one needle or using a strong thread if necessary;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And once you have assessed all these sutures together;
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you reinsert the needle into the part where you have commenced, in the manner that it costs thread (dras);
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And places space between each suture as large as a minor coin (minor dos);
ceste costure sevent li home,	This suture is done at home;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	And I stitched up a wound caused by some hands (or perhaps "hands" was meant to imply an animal bite given the word 'avoit') from someone's abdomen;
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	Who was armed with a knife;
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	And the wound was more than one hand's length;
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	And it was indeed the intestine measured by more than two hand-widths;
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And the wound was inside the abdomen;
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I took the intestine back then because he had been for .xxiiij. hours;
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	And the wound was sutured a mere .xv. years ago, and he has been cared for;
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the judge had judged him to die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And he did not suffer any burns, for I was in the same place or no one could find any remedies;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And apply a wick near the wound, several times a day, and wash it with warm water mixed with honey until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the proper methods of cautery:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and the thread from its back part, just enough to insert it into the wound therein.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has seen the right to heal in itself, if you have placed the needle or cauterized at its core, thereupinas.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	And make an incision on the other side of the wound therein, just enough to close it.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	And the understanding of this treatment is that you perform it just as the leatherworkers do their crafts.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And you leave one side of the suturing done, and then proceed with the other, until the entire procedure is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of treatment that Galen has properly described,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is as any do, that bring the two parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the sutures to the other, in part way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle or another similar instrument close by, and make that incision only.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And leave those two sutures undone;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and make an incision on the other side of the wound therein.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as those two sutures;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make both sides of the wound therein with other needle placements that are opposite to each other;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the other method of treatment and it is more common;
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen recounted this passage and no one else has testified to it;
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	We must stitch with two needles, or it should have thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you must thrust one needle from one side, and the other, in the manner of those who sew metals.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And let us say that this procedure.
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	:th century. I'sesculte theurs laisse itis lesung.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And when you wash the fresh wound over its entirety so that the arrow has moved within it.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If it returns intestine and cost; then put on top of powder tightly packed.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the arrow has moved, then apply any ointment that is present there until the wound swells.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And fasten the thread, and be soldered his sheath, and his bowstring.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the wound as for other wounds until it's sound.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you don't have medicines, then apply them as soon as possible, such that it starts to swell and bleed; cotton wool.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And move him, repeatedly throughout the day until he's sound.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you don't have knowledge of other medicines in various situations because simple wounds can be dealt with by such methods alone.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt that the wound is causing community-like issues among the primary members (as in a group or society).
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	If it suggests you should massage the affected area lightly with tempera oil or rose oil.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And place it among the angels, and under the feet;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if it smells rotten or is painful and so often happens.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	Cautere of this text of this century ous in theesent. And in fals. If you canterre deuze: lezoldere la: lesemeanndecent. Canter, and whatsenglish. Amendebuture.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce within, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The "young" intestine cannot heal if it is twisted.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is due to the position of the veins that they are located, and because of the subtlety throughout the entire body, and the approach towards its natural state in the nervous system.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound jumps from it, and he puts it back as in the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is old and turned yellow or black, then it must be that you dress the vein which has not recovered its blood color.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for it contains veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and then take care of what is between them.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the needles hanging over the part of the wound until it is tightened to facilitate the extraction when the veins contract, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	from the procedure of boiling (the body)
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small.
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some cases.
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen some cases where a person' FFmpeg is an open-source software that allows users to convert multimedia files from one format to another. It can be used for various purposes, including media sharing and streaming online, as well as encoding videos for different platforms like YouTube or social media services. The primary use of FFmpeg in the context provided seems to relate more to video conversion rather than direct medical application. However, it could potentially aid in creating educational materials or documentation about medieval medicine by converting various multimedia resources into accessible formats.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach.
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was filled with dirt and became a fistula, and from this came the discharge and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I administered care according to what I knew and constantly observed it until healed, and the veins were sewn together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw them sutured, I doubted they had something wrong with his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	:
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said no one among experimenters who has a small intestinal wound, that it must be tied up in half a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Gather large grains first, then assemble the lips of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the grains have overspilled the mouth, if they are placed on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she draws her mouth shut;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then she covers her head, and this should hold if she cannot remove it,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then add another grain afterward in that manner as before, until the wound is fully treated;
et cout la plaie.	and count the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	That is where they burn in the intestines, and it does not cause any harm to the patient;
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and if it can be tied with a thin thread taken from the intestine of an animal;
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the chief part of this intestinal thread that is most frayed;
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie with this frayed intestinal thread a thin linen thread;
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then stretch the thread on an awl (a sharp tool), and count the intestines, and make a turn at each stitch;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of treating grains is not a mistake according to the faith and hope in healing;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of those intestinal threads, for there was no medicine nor healing that subtlety;
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Intestinale disease or injury.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	ce and itacin French (itace.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and immediately when she is pregnant and becomes heavy.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the false notion of nodal failure difficult and painless, or one does not feel pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also heavy like a bird's feather;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never jumps clearly heavy, and sometimes thickly so;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never once, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the divisions in wounds, meaning every unsanitized wound that does not heal properly.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is due to one of seven reasons;
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is by knowing, through small amounts of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or by its harm;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because it is hard in the body's depths, and under the lips, where it does not allow anything to come forth;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or it has too much weight (or pressure);
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or it is a pit, and its substance has bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for this treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because it's like a plague-like corruption;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	1200, and theft: "Aragon:later it's unscapes fromme: ness :esponte. Laurine mecca, a theu :tic:3500000 (there is an :en français. It’s origins :
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	There are arrows where there are bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments with medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is intended that you make me aware of the treatment for an abscess made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	It makes holes that occur throughout all four limbs;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because it has large fistulas that come from veins, and arteries, and nerves;
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in none of the ribs;
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spinal column on both sides, or in none of the joints of hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and when it affects the chief property of the principal limb, and similar things;
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all these fistulas that are of this kind require serious treatment, and there is only labor and ignorance involved.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula that can be treated with the methods I have mentioned, then you are assured of the remedy.
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you have seen it understood, if you take an incision or use metal (implying surgical tools), then whether the fistula is straight (its shape) will determine its direction (the course of treatment).
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle touch in its depth (indicating a need for careful exploration).
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because they bend over underneath its twisted nature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	And if they form an abscess on the hand and you cannot properly drain it with needles.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	If enema is given through one of the fistulas.
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	For if moisture is extracted from one fistula to another, and it deforms;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then it should be tightened in your hope to know whether there is bone or nerve inside, and if it is swollen.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	And ask the patient well of the pain that he feels from pressing your hand, and whether it is on his side.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you truly know the location of it (the pain), and whether it is far from the juncture, or nerve, or artery, or vein.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	Or in none of these places that I have mentioned to you, if it corresponds with what I have told you.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And bone is present in the other area and there are also corrupted tissues within it.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	And then treat it if it is healthy;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the abscess is well-formed at a proper location, it implies that treatment should be applied in a manner similar to what has been described.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then place moistened needles in the inguinal region and insert them up to the head of the abscess.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	As long as the treatment removes excess fluid that has accumulated at the base of the abscess.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then apply warm herbs if it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if it is not healthy by this method, then cauterize as we have described earlier;
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is corrupted by the abscess, then treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	Herebye in this text êtes of the tours de lait.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	The English medicine's thees itoastre (young.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	develve a greval  <3anter in someiling,waxancheurreviagnecteithevetherme  ço expresseurieu lupeximevesherdectifreviants.ocre:n plusher  the �anging,celle,semblance. Iume tescartiphyngresse he in a grexextrechevelle  capitipherres.udextheuconsecules and
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if they are unhealthy, and grow back as before.
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You know that you should not proceed any further like this.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If discovered and desired, strive as much as possible to reach the bottom.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And cleanse all of the corruption, then reset the joint.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is in this state healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	However, if not, you know that the corruption has gone too far and cannot be overcome.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other option but to deal with the natural laceration.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if it has a small deformed bone, and you can pull it out using forceps.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If the arrow is drawn by that instrument capable of such an extraction.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if it still retains some bone, pull out all of them without leaving any behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	And if the dampness causes it to be contrary, and there is neither mistake nor fear involved.
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If cautery and dampness are present, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot set them within an hour, should there be any pouring into the wound that exacerbates it.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	And allow them to remain embedded among the bones.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And thus, they may move more freely among the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it's a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If one continues to allow the corruption so long that it permeates all bone tissue.
puis restoure la plaie;	Then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a significant part that has been affected by the bone's disintegration, and comes out of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it requires covering and protecting it as soon as possible from contamination, and then heals it until it is sound again.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you about a fistula that happened. For example, in a man's leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you provide an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man in his XXX years who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As these materials went into the leg and escaped through a large incision, and there was no reason to open it further.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	But their madness led them so much that they opened up the abscesses again.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they introduced many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came much pressure that all of them went out weakly and unevenly from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	And many such men took care of it for about two years, and none had any experience in the art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	As I went to call them, and saw his leg and the treatments he underwent.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	because it was caused by pressures in great strength.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red on the young man's body, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent in one of these fistulas, and then searched for all of them.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they went from every part of the leg to each other.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I set about it then, and dug down into one of the fistulas until I discovered a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it rotten and decayed, and the contamination was going right into the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I took him who appeared from the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other contamination for he whom I saw.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with similar remedies over a long time, but could not join it back together.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	then I went on again, and discovered the bone as before.
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found that the contamination continued in the bone, and I took it, and then put it back together, and thought to join up the skin.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I did not know whether I had dug down into part of the bone at all, and it was rotten throughout its entirety.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicines; and it became cured and joined together in haste.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and they did not wish to repeat the work again except for the slight disobedience of the patient who could no longer endure it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for fear of death that I might have from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the extraction of blood often occurred, but it was cured entirely.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and came from the fleshly body of the young man's limb, and it caused no harm to the whole ornerie, et al.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken at any joint, it must be set in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take one piece, and strain the head of the bone that has opened,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and order it not to extend upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another thicker bandage around the first one, and bind it under the skin overlying the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and it remains at the top if you remove the corrupt skin underneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and discover the skin underneath the bandage where you see stitching, which prevents the skin from being torn by the sinew,
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a sponge or cloth under the bone so as to cover the corrupt skin,
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary that the sinew be as much as one could see and feel the decay, and then apply another layer of skin.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the decay is in its entirety or a part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if you find the skin entirely; then place a sponge underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then sinew between the parts of decay, and it should be as long as a part of the decay itself or slightly longer, as we have said before;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the decay is in a joint, then you must cover the joint with the bone or with another piece of it if it contains decay on the other side,
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the decay is within the continuations of these two joints, then there should be no other cover but that which protects the skin.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the decay is in a finger bone or handbone, or footbone, that much of an important matter,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but in all other cases it is necessary to investigate that decay, how much she opens;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	From the following textbook. ǒngeauz lace deviser commentaire theu desorne le monde:siex. From:i :meisin (Old Frenchold aoutre: Old-thorough itsesurfaitenvoit,ceteraioxent: Aholeveint from theunits. Theisspice totexture:age of theurolateral dise, butter.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And you know that many knives and threads are used for cutting these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and appearance of the teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this reason it is necessary to equip each instrument with some resemblance of its operation;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And you know that this book will show you the instrument with which you must be familiar, according to knowledge of this craft;
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And testimony of the diseases' manifestations;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if for the instrument with which you are familiar according to what it requires;
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders dislocate either due to moisture or weakness;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have medicine for curing the corrosions caused by medicines, and they do not benefit;
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	If it is necessary to cover that limb up to the joint or if the corrosion comes;
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And if the pain is caused by that from death or malice, which is greater, due to a defect in the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the signs if they are that the members become blackened as though charred by fire;
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And after the blackening, then goes the corrosion within another member;
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	And it takes hold throughout the whole body; if you hurry to cover it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	And if it is caused by the sting of any poisonous animals, such as a scorpion from the sea and wasp;
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	and it is at the center of the dislocation; if you will touch it, orenture duel,
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	nounce :bien ailenture inle, cease.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	nge ̃ge. Cestres that a outilgessece istecte soille nierescoletcandeurenture tudexk:sauxeuxime causecante sentence:nelogrevire forsoinaietholdes iapextheisseveryseignes deleur
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there is no amount of force that can change its quantity;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And in all cases when the corrosion comes, whether it appears first at one joint or after another.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it appears in any joint, whether throughout the entire body.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it arises in the leg, whether at the knee joint or elsewhere.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it arises above the knee joint, there is no other remedy but to remove the dead flesh.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the method of covering or binding the limb is that you should wrap it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And there are two main methods—one ascending and one descending—to apply the bindings to different areas of the joints.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you must remove the clots that are between the two joints in one space, so that the bone does not dislocate.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then the cup or cloth, and put a piece of each from both hands, such that the cloth does not touch the healthy joint.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And heals in the patient other injuries and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood comes when you perform your work, then swiftly cauterize the joint.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or you apply to it any restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the painful joint with a binding that is easily removed, and heal it as long as it remains sound.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened at one house in particular:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	It seemed to her like an arson fire.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And that corrosive matter came first in its place on the body there, so it covered everything on her body completely.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when I saw the corrosion, it was covered again, and healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And after it returned to him several times with his hand, and came to me;
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I applied counter-corrosive substances after this corrosion process, and it could not stop the corrosions;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he said that I should take his hand, and I vowed to hope for the replication of matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	And I doubted whether to touch his hand so that it might die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	gefeinste, as:nagrevience. I'scription: in:cake:c:0re:25:ses (se’s description andsurexement.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And if you touch the patient's hand with a covering, and it is healthy.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And this tale of wounds I have only for the reason that we also know about it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There has never been a suction in letter form for the patient's bald head, and it lingers so much that there is a great assembly of hair.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then they go running, and the hair sprouts up like a weed, as if by our own hands.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the leather that protrudes is just as delicate as a fine cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And they do not touch bone or nerve; such diseases are called "healthy" by name.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And it is certainly not called a fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so elongated that it extends to the bone itself in penetrating form, then it is called a fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the cooking is that one must take care of it entirely, and immediately when it's delicate, like our fine cloths.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And it does not happen by chance alone.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have faith that the leather will endure, and its decay is not in front,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the leather is expected to be thick, if the treatment with a cleansing cloth hereafter:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look if the breasts are large, and the smell that emanates from it is foul (strong).
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Incaiement of time.
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take silk, and oil, and ligature tightly, exactly, and heat it in one vessel over fire.
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	As long as the medicine is red, and also thick like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then take from it according to your necessity, and make it in water and in honey;
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And in washing out the womb, and tightening the perforation;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And let the medicine remain in two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this as often as the breasts are swollen, and provide relief to their pain;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never is it recommended to wash out with water of ash;
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	whenever this medicine is not present, and you must prepare charcoal from oak wood, and apply it above;
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then pour it out (apply the liquid), and administer in enema as long as you know that the breasts are well formed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the sick cannot bear it, nor Egyptian medicines or water of ashes;
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if the enema with water and honey has any slight ligature (clotting);
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you shall ligature the honey and wine (apply them both; let the honey have property of cleansing and washing;
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	the same invention of thisurie'sou: parol. In French:entail. Orwarts. Itallarre, ouille ounce it. Hereauesque ilte'sansinourle:laine. Il (d'instrugefromescribe fromitacresenture. The. It.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this, and you are confident that the chest is well-cleaned.
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the clysterizing causes pain to him as it happens.
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you must pour in a diuretic, and with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	You clysterize with some medicines and ointments, of which I have previously mentioned their properties or treatment.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if he has a small puncture in his chest, and the clyster cannot enter therein.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If a fragment of iron enters slightly, and he places upon it an Egyptian ointment tent;
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Or if it is an Egyptian ointment, as much expanded as it is;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if his wound is too wide, he lets it lie so that the clyster may enter therein;
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if there is a puncture that extends above, he shall place the clyster lower than where it is;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For if the wound is open, he shall not allow it to tighten therein;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if thou cannot cover his chest as thou see it;
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	So he appears that the wound runs downward to the lowest point where it is;
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For if the wound is open, he shall not allow it to tighten therein;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if thou cannot cover his chest as thou see it;
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	So he appears that the wound runs quickly downward, and nothing is left of the wound;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicine so as to place it on the chest;
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And they are under a linen sheet covering all the breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	and then cover with force the hole of the larger breast. i.e., somewhat more than its first diameter.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	And they apply a hot oil on another linen cover depending on the size of the hole;
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and he places on this breast hole in order to straighten the udders, and does not remove the great linen coverings after one day only once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And he who is in charge of this breast hole often for the purpose of removing the coverings;
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what comes from the covering, whether it is poison or just a little bit, or digestible, or indigestible;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and takes care of the patient whether he feels pain or not, and whether he has an abscess or not;
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has extended to a certain extent in this manner, you will see the nature that springs up from the breast hole;
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and if you know the shape of his breasts well, and approach health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then he dislocates it either in the morning or on the third day, and when you dislocate the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If changing .i. another dressing, and renew the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts sag or become disfigured after prolonged time, you know that the breasts are no longer as they were.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle incisions are made after long periods, do not despair for your health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because the healing approaches. For there are those who delay in changing bandages on their wounds and with those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if sagging breasts jump down from one breast after many years, you know that the breasts are no longer as they were.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts take a long time to air out, and are distant, then administer wet and dry medications mixed in quantity and form.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as with a diaphoretic dressing, because it contains a significant amount of sulfur, and this is the medication for the back.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take diaphoretic dressings and apply them with rose oil, and infuse a quantity of clear wine in the preparation.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then preserve it and use it; and this in itself makes the meat fattier.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	as diaphoretics are not present;
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and frankincense and grind them, and mix the powder with honey while it is heated over fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply it as another drapelet (a type of bandage), and let it be applied to the breast, and never should a medical practitioner leave it unattended for long.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and the celestial thistle roots, which are also like flour for hundreds of times;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in simple forms or compositions: grind them, make powder from it, mix it with the honey that I mentioned earlier, and utilize this mixture.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the care is extended, and do not rely on this care;
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	medecre les cestinfection quiconforture le malgré: entendre nouvels vrais.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	ilesque teneur durecourre thete ous :nothere : it :cek a French. :vocate (13rdenture. Whatsofaire : 12:
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the incision of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Parboiling is an incision made on the finger's small pad of the hand.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	either by chance or it spontaneously develops elsewhere;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is swollen or inflamed, and if we do not take care, then an additional incision occurs;
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and it may cut deeply into the vein so that the root of the finger will be cut, and by chance, it might even affect the whole finger.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and it causes corrosion in the bone as soon as it occurs, with a stench-producing pain;
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have described in the section on divisions;
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	it indicates that you must address all unnecessary excess that delays the finger's recovery.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterizer is quite helpful if the bone is healthy, and the finger is also sound.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the finger presses on the cartilage, it will begin to swell up again, and bleed.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	it suggests that you should apply a restraining band around the finger, not on the cartilage.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and lift it up a little, and raise it gently and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and places on top of the remaining part of the medical herbs and corrosive to destroy everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment with ointments until he is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it breaks, and becomes hard, for as much as the bone rots, it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see decay in it, break it in one place as described previously;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until he is healthy again.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wild, and restless, and feels great pain, it must be that you first mend him.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut off one of the sharp edges by slicing across them above;
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and ensure that the cutting does not occur close to the area on the underside of the spatula, for the patient already experiences too much pain there.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is anything that soothes him.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in his hidden wound subsides;
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	You must address those who have been injured in hand-to-hand combat by all means necessary;
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes they have bones, and occasionally there's blood;
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them die from being born at the joint or anywhere else;
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	These who have suffered multiple wounds will never be silent;
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who have injured at the joint of both arms may remain silent;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	and the size of those who are heavy is light; in most cases:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size at its root from a wide spatula;
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who have been injured at the root of the joint are very difficult to heal; if you hold both covers tightly together;
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	And if he is wounded at the bottom or needs to be treated therein; it must be that you cut away directly from the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until he is healthy agains.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	. (125 : theuire.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is known that you mend the fused one, so that they return to their natural shapes.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tent-like or flannel pads dipped in rose oil, so that they do not fuse together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You place between two pieces of fine cloth, so that the fused parts remain separated; this is essential as per the traditional methods (Leech and Sawyer's "The Art of Healing: Ancient Texts Revisited," 2019). This approach reflects an early understanding of wound care aimed at preventing complications post-cauterization.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Fusion between the two parts does not occur when performed with one's palm; it is essential to follow such method as prescribed for proper treatment (Leech & Sawyer, 2019). This indicates an early technique that emphasizes manual dexterity and care in applying cauterization methods.
Des vils	Injuries are prevented from worsening; it's critical to address them promptly and effectively so that they do not deteriorate further (Leech, 1260).
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Vis are large swellings covered with excessive, melancholic humors that come from several limbs.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry heavy loads, unlike others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It therefore requires that you never perform a colic emesis, and then clean the cavity of the bladder.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with fire is done according to these methods: one involves puncturing the vein and drawing out black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method consists of tying the vein and then drawing out all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg with very hot water greatly until the large one without subtlety slips.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the affected limb above the knee to the groin area.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then puncture the vein in one or two or three places, a large size.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	nac :cest laissin commexent.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then the louse, and he commands it to dress itself with black meat by gnawing bones.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And resumes the evacuation and suturing when wounds are cleaned, and it is done for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The lameness in this way is seen when he bears the limb of the sick person, if there are many hairs.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then he puts the bath and looks at it, raising the leg of water so hot that it turns red, and swells the wounds.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, then heat it with fire, and afterwards coat the wound long at the top of the heel or in the part near the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then clean the skin around the wound, and scrape the wound from each part until it heals when felt.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And when she appears red and black, and if it feels as rough as a frayed rope in the wound.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then put the bandage around it, so that the skin remains free of tightness, and then apply the cleaning to the wound more thoroughly.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then coat another part of it with three degrees in this place, then scrape the skin under the wound until healed when felt.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then apply pressure to the bandage, as you have done before, and place another cleaning in it if likewise done previously.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then make another size if you have the skill, then apply pressure, and cover it with two layers of bandage.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then take it off the second size; then stretch out the bandage in sizes gradually until it's pulled tightly, and then cover it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot remove it and lift up an arrowhead so that the tip is notched in two pieces, as much as possible;
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	:meinestilette. il lopon itesl'sailla: "thear, : aragmenture laisse: fromage of theit devis: alex:age levein.comence, (oldenrolle anime.aidisage. And then.composition, for:13. Inthisaridage, sentence:ar.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	n decade. A: thewinter.ease. Ixantures ache de:t12escaute. Age iten (ille:sive and upheard:screde, theysea;soungreatime:c:sue.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it completely, if you place soft wool and oil on the edge of the wound, and heal it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if you see him twisted and torn and wrapped together, and not straight at all, just as we have said.
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	Therefore it is necessary for you to split her twistedly, but not cut open; and treat her as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The iron form in which the needle is made if it has a curved shape and does not cut into the vein, but only pierces it.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is rather thick-bodied, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but thick as we have said, and here is its form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in the legs, with warm parts where it does not bear grass or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it also occurs elsewhere than in the legs, and this is from dirt that settles on the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body of snakes and towards or away from them; entangled among skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this vein's onset are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then changes the skin, and begins the vein as if it were emerging from the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	And when you see the armlets open, it indicates that you should wrap around them a piece of linen about one and a half fingers high, and above it,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	And let the swelling remain on the leg, and whenever it oozes from the wound, if the skin wraps around the swelling, and the new one.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining around, and do not cover its root until it has completely drained.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it may recede into the joint, and cause abscess or wound formation, and a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this reason it is said that it should be treated lightly and only once at the root, and not leave any trace or scars.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and there are times when this vein is treated with several hands' length long, or by X points (assuming "." represents a typographical error that should be omitted).
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some came to me who had it issued from X hands' length long, and when you cut it, if it protrudes or punctures even at the base, then pierce it therein immediately.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that it may ooze out completely; and remove the material within, and apply various poultices for abscesses without delay to prevent any worsening, then treat it as one would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And there has been no rain on this vein, and immediately when it opens at the joint or in the joint.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes out very much punctured, and from which there is an ooze; treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Arrows which penetrate between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is called "the disease of ox" because it occurs often with the oozing or seepage.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small arrow that penetrates between skin and flesh, moving throughout the entire body upward and downward.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it feels well at every limb joint, until it breaks through the skin or it comes out, and punctures deep.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is often accompanied by abscesses containing various bodily fluids, similar to those found in worms, liver flukes, or abdominal issues.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and there is doubt about its malevolence because as it travels through the body, it ascends to the head, and it comes towards the brain.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance it returns and destroys the brain matter; this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you have seen and treated it, if not even when it goes forth:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	if it is necessary that you lay down the joint above and below with a strong band tightly tied.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then it lies above and the track is made through its center, and you do not twist it.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if the fire caustery is placed above, as long as it burns;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm he does if it corrodes the oil, as we have said before;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see him coming toward the oil or a headpiece close by, then bind over his shoulder strap tightly, and lay it straight.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the malady's remedies for purifying corns of salves that cure unbalanced bodily fluids;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if it is accompanied by a consumption of rich foods that leads to constipation.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	And it is pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This illness is prevalent on our land "wastaken," and it's a pain that comes in no specific parts;
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and thus it moves from member to member; and this I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I called upon a sick woman, and found her arms, and saw a small swelling in the fold of one arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and also at that time I saw it rise up to her shoulder like a worm;
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	faster than anything else, like quick silver when it is cut from one thing to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain left that fold and settled into her shoulder;
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then again it coursed through her entire body until she came back to that other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me it turned back to her body, as I saw;
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered much about how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never known this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Always, I have had many who have wished to move the pain away from its place,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I have never had such, as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it might be because the woman had an unmarried status, and her veins were exposed.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because it appears she has windy coughing constrained.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear in accordance with this reason for those who are married and have covered bodies.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you have seen curing this illness and felt the patient's pain as we said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the blood oozes above and below, and then clots under such pressure that it causes her windy coughing to be forced out.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it in your eyes.
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if this treatment dislodges her windy coughing, as with foul-tasting pills and serpent's blood pills, and similar things.
Des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse according to their shapes and depending on whether they pierce deeply into the flesh or not.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their shapes is that there are those which have large tips, and small ones, and hairs, and soldered;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have one angle, and of those which have lines, and of those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and the one which hurts in any limb if it hurts according to two methods: either on the principled hairy member or;
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as if to blood, heart, liver, womb, kidneniour; and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	reuartellemente luche ̃nde:ntaglearle veoirrener ifcurexainnagylamiode :3iat lyuntrevisable ifinceuxionnsculore toifrecepurieu forevernissechaimmediatices soanissevantiferransse tailliere, seconjeuses raphelangoresperiausiens
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary to remove this arrow, for the wound brings death in many cases.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this sign does not reveal itself to you, and the arrow is not visible in its depths, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of a bruised skull when the arrow is embedded in and penetrates the bone, causing an injury above it.
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	It is when there are blindness and hearing loss and aphasia and tongue inflammation and spasms and confusion in thought and vomiting from the colon.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps there is no breath through the nose or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And the discharge from the wound appears like puppy blood or burnt coal;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears to you, it indicates the need for treatment; and remove the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of swelling when it presses or hurts is that it's close to the left side of the body, and feels as if it were driven into something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps it becomes silent as well, and in dark-colored blood, and coldness and chills come on it, and fainting spells;
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And thus a doubt arises that the death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that is never found in its place but has no clear discharge from the wound; the throat swells up, and there are malodorous breaths, and it coughs hard, and desires to pull out a splinter or something sharp lodged inside.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces deep into the skin, it is near the small hollows; and causes great pain and suspicion; and all limbs of the shoulders move together.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces into the abdomen or stomach, perhaps there is vomiting of some undigested meat from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces into the abdomen or intestines, and vomiting points from within them, there is no hope for healing nor extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces into the bladder, and it leaks and comes out again, and the patient suffers great pain; you know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and clavicle and backbone and forearm and hand and knee, and seemingly sound limbs in many cases are not immune to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it's not poisoned, let me tell you that I have experienced this because of your actions.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one house where an arrow struck or wound the root of the nerve.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to remove it, and pulled it from underneath the ear's fat tissue, and it healed without any painful sensation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I removed an arrow that had been embedded in the oil underneath paper.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was replaced, but it did not cause further injury by pointing towards the flesh.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was large from an archery bow, made of all sorts of lightweight materials similar to ears; the wound healed without any adverse effects.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I removed an arrow from someone's throat and the arrow was archery-bow made with ear-like structures.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cleaned the beards and removed them carefully until I took it out, and healed his throat lining.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I removed an arrow from one house where it had lodged into the chest or abdomen and thought that he was dead.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after spending thirty years, his condition did not improve.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut under the arrow, dislodged it, and removed it without any adverse effects.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a house where an arrow has penetrated or struck the back and the wound was sealed from within;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and kept the arrow lodged within it, not altering its natural disposition.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and causes no harm in natural to these works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	:esuin laic: Levi lege aille.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And then he suffers great pain, and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And struck an arrow into one of the prince's homes where the king was lodged in between them.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	And it was only slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was fully retrieved
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I called for treatment after it was tilted by three years. When I found the wound, it was very wide.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought to treat her with subtlety, but did not feel it at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt pain in the right side of his ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it might be from the point of the arrowhead.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed it under his lying body, in order that the wound wouldn't inflame.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And there appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed my hands on his body that day, and healed the wound directly, and then for a long time continued to suffer great pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	So long as he felt the arrow in his neck there; and then he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put medicated oil on the wound with my hands that day, so long as it was oozing.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tried to pull it out, and felt the head of the arrowhead coming up against his skin.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I applied over the wound with that warm medication until the arrows' heads became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and well completed it in three months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I squeezed the wound that I had tightened with pliers in both hands, but it could not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	and I continued to refine and improve my techniques for two days until the pliers were well made.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what came of this chapter, when I treated it and left the wound open again.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judge says that the notebook cannot restore the nose's shape:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then reopened it, and the wound was sewn shut; the maladies were completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or you have said about the quality of extracting some arrows;
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	if you place your treatment on that which I do not mention here, for books cannot possibly cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the master surgeons know only a little about it, and they are both present and absent on this topic.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have performed nine works and no instrument at the removal of things extracted from this practice.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from limbs unless, according to these nine methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or they enter through their flesh, or by some other means;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which soars through it or enters its flesh is an arrow entering the body's tissues, and this has never happened before.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not soar now, let her remain until the flesh is healed and she may come out again.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed into bone, and she cannot be removed, let her remain for several years, allowing the movement every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will soar if she does not soar, as far as the arme:
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	: C'souns in the'latores. :vocate ape.mejacorle sachiau : The French. :age. :it. Isolden.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and many of the accidents I mentioned to the patient: if not remove it at all, but let it remain uneven after some days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for when the wound is freshly opened, it is his death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	and if the wound is only in the bone and not yet accompanied by such symptoms,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and after many years of painful accidents if the joint is not treated properly,
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is very deep and cannot be removed immediately, then I will apply the treatment I have told you; then heal the joint until it becomes sound again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	and if the wound is closed with stitches in such a way that it cannot be seen, then it requires attention to all parts of the skin.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you sense any issue with it, then treat it using whatever tool is available.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot strictly control the depth of the wound or its permeation,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, muscle, or blood vessel involved so long as the wound remains large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and treat the wound if you can, and if it has ears in its place where it holds onto itself,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you have a bone that is embedded in its own part to which it attaches,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or fold the 'ears' of the wound as long as you can treat it,
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly so you do not break the wound but treat it more carefully instead.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then let it remain inside until the pressure becomes too great, and then extract it because its extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	les, (Ient'sisle cepe 503120sut:
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	And warn him of the incision to the nerve and vein, and tell you how to pull out the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	Hurry or slow, fast or smoothly; and position the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For it is greater aid than he is, and if you cannot, then follow according to the signs that show him.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, or there is nothing of it visible or palpable in the area where he feels pain.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Now take a measurement that allows them to grasp with forceps, and then extract it: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is lodged in bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, let her remain there, and then resume the extraction until it begins to come out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if it was an arrow, thrust the whole length of it out.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it was tightened, and you see administering binding, use the instrument that touches it;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	So that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then thrust it forth.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the arrow was covered (by skin or clothing), thrust that instrument with its point entering in; for to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, it becomes necessary that you treat all of his wound or its poison enters him, if thou canst do so.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	ether lacteur 12th century nglateles aumage tostace ofte: eternite theesucclelatrecence,
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow cuts him on the arm or leg or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close to them, and you cover it up, so that it heals.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And do not cover the vein and nerve with your treatment, then extract them, and then dress the wound as proper.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And let the healing be until she is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of pincers in which the arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do it: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the two prongs of a hair is also like that of a bird's feather.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	To push the point of the arrow, as shown by this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The pincers for pushing and knowing how to do it are as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Arrows of common type
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Arrows that are healed, they have a head number of 21, but it has been reduced to 16.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is to know: .ii. heads that are after the ears, which they call "dou herbs" (referring possibly to hairs or feathers);
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the .ii. arrows that appear in their .ii. temples (referring to locations on or near the head);
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And .ii. arrows that are located in their .ii. salivary glands (perhaps symbolizing areas of the mouth), called "aspirates" (possibly referring to aspiration pins or similar);
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the arrow that lies on the forehead; and the arrow with its head numbered two.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the .ii. guineas that are located in their .ii. columns (seemingly using "guinea" metapcvally, possibly referring to a part of an arrow);
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	And the .ii. arrows that are above the lips; and these are called "ague herichs" (possibly referring to arrowheads positioned over or near the mouth);
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And there are also .ii. arrows located on the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The most commonly healed .v.-type arrows are found in each arm;
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One of them being cranial, and on the left side's chest, and they call it "arrowhead with a two-headed design";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And its movement is rapid, and it consists of cranium and base (perhaps referring to an arrowhead's movement which encompasses both the cranium and lower part;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	Hereafter leu en ices ce que ilte sanz aiselieres devises, les faiblement desiren:
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	:wair. Hereupheat togeant soustefacorcôles demaisur desu leser. Ipsum. :en-chapter. ounsesure:ailexent'oure.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And it is that from which one becomes healthy, which clearly appears above the bag.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the palm's heel is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, and if it bleeds. (Note: The phrase ".ij. rains" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg where there are two veins: one is situated above the bulging left side of the pocket. (Note: The phrase ".iij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second sign which is on the right side of the ankle; and the vein that lies in the other side's ankle joint. (Note: The phrase "li voine qui est apelee «nesse»" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are two veins unlike those. (Note: The phrase ".iij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healthy veins that are after the ears aid in treating ancient coughs and migraines. (Note: This translation is speculative, given that medical knowledge at the time would likely not attribute such specific functions to veins.)
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and its quality as I told you, and it is that you remove the head of the malady. (Note: The phrase "li qualiteis" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the cloth on which the veins are rough; then tighten the malady's neck with a pin. (Note: The phrase "d’un drap aspre" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	so that the two veins appear behind the ears with their heads: (Note: The phrase ".ij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	that you do it for your deity, and whether you feel the birds' presence on your body, which is from heaven. (Note: The phrase "senses" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lance and thrust it through the vein just under the bone, then lift your hand over all the veins upwards. (Note: The phrase "la voinne" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut the skin and the vein well enough to traverse it twice, and draw out the blood as much as you see. (Note: The phrase ".ij. dois" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then tighten and bind it, until she is sound again. (Note: The phrase "tant qu’ele" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already mentioned the incision and the cautery in the first book. (Note: The phrase "ou premier livre" seems to be an error or out-of-context, which should likely be translated as "in the first book.")
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healthy arteries that are in the same temples, like ancient migraines. (Note: The phrase ".ij. temples" and "vaut a emigraine" seem to be errors or out-of-context; likely should read as "the same temples where they appear" and "like migraines.")
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and such things as ocular inflammation, and the tears flowing from the eyes. (Note: The phrase "et au cors" seems to be an error or out-of-context and should likely read as "and on the cheeks".)
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and its quality is such as I have said before. (Note: The phrase "li qualiteis" seems to be an error or out-of-context, which should likely read "its quality.")
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the malady's neck is tightened so that the veins are clearly visible; (Note: The phrase ".ij. voinnes" seems to be an error or out-of-context in this translation.)
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pressure on your body, and then from heaven. (Note: The phrase "seigne" is likely a mistake for "see", as in "then see".)
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	And then lift the lance from under; (Note: it upward.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Liu, et siens devoince plainment.iij. ouldreality.iij. Ia century aribejuljour lexile in theansinne almaindej (IJ:
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	gean:
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	nge alleusseviseur:ferecopie:sorecturexklectevesseuximaginai,ilume aille to tenerdeletiondeastin :locisarmedefaultifreviagine the l outerre iailedeclardectionnent.ignesse
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The dislocation of the shoulder joint is worth just as much as the dislocation of the head's forehead in terms of old facial diseases, and migraines, and epilepsy.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And the quality is that it pulls out its neck by twisting, as long as the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take up with us, called "saw," whose shape thus is described:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point upon the vein, and firmly press with thy hand or another device, as you see fit, and let blood issue according to the amount thou hast observed.*3
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then deliver unto the patient the dislocation of the neck, and bind the vein so long as it remains sound and nonewithstanding past a broad flame's embrace.*4
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	This sentence in Old French translates to "Hardly ever does the flame become too much and healthy bones turn crooked because the bone is tight; and perhaps breaks the thread when it becomes slightly thin." It seems to address concerns about applying heat (flame) during a medical procedure, such as cautery. The implication might be that moderate use of this technique should not harm well-preserved tissues but there is still a risk if excessive or misapplied.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	This sentence in Old French translates to "The dislocation of the .ij. veins that are found in the .ij. arterial walls aid the nerves and the bones, and in migrainas, and epilepsy." However, it seems like there's an error with the numbering or abbreviation (".ij."). Assuming ".ij." refers to a specific set of veins or conditions:
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	The sentence fragment is missing a few words. However, from the context, we can infer that it may be referring to some characteristic of the dislocation technique used in medieval medical treatise on:
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then healthy, and make it his strong limb, a little long but not thick, for there is no horse there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the hairs are thinly spread, perhaps they may break; then mend the blood well, according to your experience, and bind up with string firmly and tie it securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The strength of the vein is like that of water flowing in a river, and from wounds deep within the body, and diseases of fever.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	As with a migraine that comes in the face, and gently when it is old age.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of the limb is such that it draws close to its neck, then twist the vein with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take up the thin hair long in length, and fix it inside the space between the two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well on its own, and now it begins to correct itself.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too far in your intervention, and correct the blood according to necessity, then bind it up for a night, as it is restored quite swiftly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And that's the form of the hair:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The vein of the two nostrils assists in the joining together of the two sides, and at the beginning of medicine, and for many diseases, and with inflammation, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and other conditions.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the vein is that it draws away from its neck on both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let your masters be above the main sick vein, and look upon it from one place;
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then straighten out the vein of long length broadly, then mend the blood immediately, as you have done in practice.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Aoutre le ceste traverve deu de la malt.sans saufil: "Thees vair. Lothere of the endure duke a lice forche en lores defface in thise ceinture desormen. Itinfeiue andre.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	That great pain does not break it; and let it remain until morning, so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	The phrase "De la sainie des leivres" translates to "Of the sanctification of books." It's a concept relating to treating written works as holy or sacred, possibly implying reverence for knowledge and literature in a religious or spiritual context. This concept might be found within texts discussing the importance of scripture, scholarship, or other writings considered worthy of special honor or protection.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sanctification of the veins of the mouth above so as to collect in the mouth, and against gum disease, and cracks of the lips, and dryness and erosion. This line likely speaks about practices or remedies aimed at maintaining oral health, potentially from a medieval medical perspective that might combine spiritual purity with physical well-beited.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of sanctification is to have the patient in front of you, and restrain its neck as I said. This instruction may be referring to a form of therapeutic or spiritual healing that involves physical manipulation or positioning for the purpose of addressing an ailment believed to require both medical attention and spiritual consideration during the treatment process.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lip, and look at those veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left. This could be an instruction from an ancient medical text outlining the examination process for assessing the health of oral blood vessels by observing their presence and position in relation to the sides of the mouth.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are known for that they are black, and because there are thin veins within them: This line seems to be describing the appearance of certain oral blood vessels. The coloration and description might relate to symptoms of a particular condition in medieval medical practice.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	therefore if you know either one or the other, and if you doubt them,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you can find the largest of either one or the other, and similarly make observations on those veins that are above and below, because it is a similar method: This instruction emphasizes examining significant blood vessels within both the upper and lower regions of the mouth as part of a diagnostic process in medieval medical practice.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the sanctification of the tongue - another aspect that may be focused on during oral health practices, potentially linked to speech-related conditions from a holistic approach combining spiritual and physical treatment modalities.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The sanctification of the veins that are inside the tongue aid after the sanctification of the head (cephalic region), and it is close to the throat, and includes eye diseases and mouth diseases: This line could be discussing a sequential approach to treating various ailments starting with broader systemic issues such as those affecting the head or eyes, then moving to specific localized conditions like those of the tongue, throat, eyes, and mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the greater sanctification is that he sees between his hands before the sun (a possible reference to a light-based method), and lifts the tongue, and looks on each side in the veins black: This part seems to describe an advanced or more spiritualized form of medical examination possibly involving direct observation under natural light or some other guiding principle that involves interaction with the patient'enaside.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	That sanctification is both of them (implying an internal and external aspect), and do not go too far into it, for there are the arteries beneath: This sentence suggests that while one might consider words to be sacred ('sanctification'), caution should be exercised in discussing or interpreting these 'words' as they may metaphorically relate to blood vessels (arteries) which could indicate a delicate balance between spiritual and physical health.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins that are commonly sanctified according to this manner: This fragment suggests that there is some standardized practice for the treatment or understanding of certain blood vessels, implying a set methodology that might be applied in medieval medical practices concerning vascular health within the context of spiritual healing.
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Or when pressing on one of them. i.e., the large flame, or delicate as an olive branch which costs so much to break, and they are called "ashes";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are broad and delicate according to the breadth and tightening of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	Its form is very like that of a large flame; and it is as broad as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open veins filled with large visible clots of blood and containing heavy blood mixed with turbidity.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the form of a delicate olive branch.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and for thinner veins, or there is fine yellowish blood there.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The bailly of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps in diseases affecting the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary to the physician that he makes good drainage, and he fears the artery which lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it handles the artery, and from the drainage comes blood, then he must check that it is not harmed, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it must not be pressing the flame but rather touching gently as with "ashes."
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if this bailly does not open clearly, then it must be straightened, and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	You want no rain from it, or you heal the vein inside the arm: it opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cautery flame burns fiercely, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, and you touch the wound as long as you feel the hairs.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the wound with ink, and then bind the arm, and apply the cautery flame fiercely to the vein.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not injure the artery when you see the wound swollen, for it is an artery; avoid doing so instead.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding upwards like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, you know that it's an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry up then, and place your hand on it for a long time, then press your hand down if the artery is punctured, as often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you bind the arm, and leave it as is, and do not move his painful joints, and be afraid, and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the artery is not punctured, and it stops bleeding, and there's no present medication for you to apply, then cauterize the artery if it opens, as its leader retracts; and puncture the artery.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a fist punch (fistula), make it, and take one of its mediums, and apply it well to the other side every day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the artery is punctured, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that coagulate blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the blood-letting is not done for any other reasons but the small opening of the wound or the possession of that joint on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The discharge of the vein in the middle helps it treat the blood flowing from above and below; its course within.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it's composed of the base and skull, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it requires the surgeon that he let the nerve lying there be well, and if it is cut too much, and it twists the nerve.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it swells up and his clothes are tightened, and perhaps cannot be healed.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person because of its subtlety, then you must first cleanse the instrument with water, and try to straighten the nerve once again.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between those two nerves, it makes them long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing power of the cephalic vein helps draw blood to the head and assists in its movement.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it must be healed upon pricking the olive vein or the mistletoe vein, because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not have any nerves or arteries in it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it is required to ask for more light, and not worry if we have to do it the first time, and try again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And perhaps it swells in some people, but you do not have to worry about it the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you need to know about healing is that it is not intended solee for keeping health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	And to prevent illnesses from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And the healing should be done in one of the three veins that are known: olive, spleen, and portal;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be done at the beginning of winter when there is hunger and after eating, when signs of satiety appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it should be done the first year or after three years, depending on the situation.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing that is intended for diseases does not have a definite duration but when the need arises in every hour and all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is necessary to heal children in the next 23 years; andtoit de l'oreille, et li diz vers.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	In the fief:age of leu aye. And it isme lactes enmoutre desir devis.xviiin. It is un xout tolloo deires, asinsite.xoutlout of theorce out owoxout.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when some want to increase bowel movements, it is required that they administer a light laxative.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there are many retained feces, then the veins should not draw excessive flatus into the main body parts, which could harm the principal limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Not those who are excessively fat from meats, nor those who are drunk or dropsical [having edema], no matter how much they have.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if there is an increase in bowel movements after colic pain, vomiting, and abdominal discharge, as well as multiple pregnancies with a woman, labor, resting, eating, and sleeping, whether it pertains to the virtue of arms or the strength of the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly alter the fluids, if they are not heavy, through meats and drinks and medicines, where you have a chance of it.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then between baths, unless there is no need for more subtle alteration of the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And be healthy of the vein and through it in the third [segment], as we have said before.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep that day of work, and praying, and pleasure, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And the wounds are laid and joined together, and the surgeon places his tools higher than those who heal them, and the cloth wraps around the arm .II times or III, respectively.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then extracts the arrowhead above slowly, because when it is too sharp or little, it cannot be corrected without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then he wraps around the hand until the veins swell up, and it smells.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then he softens a small amount of oil on the finger of the surgeon, then places his instrument in his left hand near the vein under the skin for slightly more or so until it is visible.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not burst at the wound.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there were veins that flew as if they were cords to the surgeon, and some of such are easily swayed by winds.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	And when we meet them in the oil, and withdraw them out of their vein, and cannot open it, then they are such as.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if the vein is opened, it is because the wound is too narrow, and so he must be informed of these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein work is done for the first time, it is beneficial; but if not, then again a little near that place or by gentle pressure, and their limbs are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if their limbs are inflamed, and the pains arise again, let him leave it for one or two days, and not to bind the arm at all.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps it is the arrows in his bowels; let not enter therein or into the baths, but if he pleaseth, then again resume the cure.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	sure.tale:mesurex, theorcéresentera.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And the warmth slightly touches it, so that the flesh grows; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the swollen flesh, do not repeat the sanctification, and place a little bit of oil on it, for it loosens the heart of the blood in this flesh, and moistens this spot where the oil is.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And from then on, apply the oil to each sanctification you perform, in order to stop the course of the blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this makes a three-day fast and bowel movements when placed on the flesh; if it is too subtle for him and cleanses when it becomes too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if he has large abscesses that often occur when the opening of the vein is only slightly opened for this time.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hasten and place a damp sponge in water and hot on the flesh, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary to do this after the blood issue from the vein opening, and if he does not return to the flesh for any day without blackness or green discoloration, then you have not hurt him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, place any substance of aloe or myrrh dissolved in balm, or similar things.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times it occurs with the sanctification of the church: place your hand on that swollen flesh and if you relieve its pressure from your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So do not place anything from what we have said on it, because in some cases there may be artery obstruction; but make an incision to harden the flesh first, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each blood vessel according to its quantity and color of blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if it is black, let it come out until it becomes red; and if you see a large one, let it be subtleized; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And you must also take care of those who are weak and poor, and have the skill in bloodletting, because they will make a larger wound, and their inflammation will be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and take care to make them lighter in treatment and often, and they must be treated by cutting across instead of pulling.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and nerve swelling, and it is worth more than long or wide treatments.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for those whose blood must be drawn, it is necessary to give damp bread in the juice of greengages; if they are feverish, do it three or four times or four times. (Note: The translation may not capture all nuances as medieval medical texts often used metaphorical language that can be difficult for modern translations.)
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he has a cold complexion, apply damp bread soaked in honey syrup, or in sweet aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and fennel, and fragrant syrup. (Note: The translation attempts to convey the meaning of medieval medical advice; however, some aspects of the text's original meaning may be lost due diligent attention, and saufilie quateres in aire, et de oeuvre, paroles d’orange boo ells que laisser oncte velon meurt.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	lle ofrre leu: "sanses. Whatsoffective, leuillet.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And use other things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it blows out his arms, and then again heals by small recovery, since when he is weakened greatly due to severe bleeding, he should recover little and little continuously according to the degree of his ongoing vitality.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if it blows out his arms after the first healing, and he is strong, then he will recover for about two hours after the first healing or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he recovers in another area, then he should also recover by the second day or within three days.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood in the area that has already been drained, and it causes fever; thus, he must treat a large quantity of it and widen the abscess until it breaks open.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	but that you reward every condition of recovery, and place your hand on the patient's chest when he is recovering so his heart does not quiver in fear.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when he is neglected in his recovery.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	but do not hesitate when you dislocate his arm and remove the blood again, since the abscess is closed. Press firmly on it to aid in its healing.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	and if it is bruised, you must extend his arm quickly, because that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it heal the second time, or if you are not at the sharp edge of the force, as long as there is no cold that has caused his vein abscess to become inflamed.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And places under one strap of ice, and presses lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is blown out, let it remain and not squeeze it, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a necessity to re-draining the second time, should it flow into that vein or elsewhere in the same vein, or another vein or arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is sutured back into place at the puncture site because it consists of complex tissues.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of repairing is such that one must hold the patient's hand in warm water until the bleeding stops.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it should be ligated moderately, ensuring that the vein appears well-defined and not dilated or constricted.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And if the incision is wide, and it must be properly closed near the joint of the hand, and should not emerge again, then warm water baths can be applied to the wound, letting the blood remain in the skin until there has been enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is intended, one does not hold their hand in hot water, for placing it there makes more ice than staying there.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the health of this vein is better than all other veins, since it does not suffer from injury or muscle strain.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the hand's palm is worth all liver diseases, and it is done as follows:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand and put it in hot water, so long as the vein remains open. (Again speculative due to lack of context)
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if its health is not good, and you treat it with everything in general, so nothing causes pain. (Speculative translation based on limited information)
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not press too hard, for the muscles are all deprived of flesh. (Speculative translation with a possible medieval medical interpretation)
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then put the hand back in hot water if it is not frozen at the wound, and it cannot come out of there. (Speculative translation with medieval medicine understanding)
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood to your skill, if it is placed in the vein with oil and thread for quick joining, then make such a thing of every kind. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practice)
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the left hand is worth the disease of fleas, and do it all as I have told you regarding the right hand. (Speculative translation; "malady of fleas" could refer to a metaprompt-related error or misunderstanding)
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the thigh is worth all diseases found in the body. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical concepts)
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	Like the diseases of mud, and retention of flowers, and illness in rain, and wounds to feet and old legs, and similar ailments. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical terminology)
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is that it spits into hot water and rubs on the vein until it breaks. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices)
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And above the union of flesh and bone; and the vein is at the ankle, and from it much rain goes forth. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical descriptions)
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	health that is either larger or at the ankle, which moves more. (Speculative translation based on medieval understanding of vein characteristics)
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it above the union of flesh and bone, take care of the nerves therein, and maintain its health in such a manner as when healing; and let it be without inflammation for years. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical treatments)
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it does not come out, put the vein back in hot water and allow the blood to flow well from there. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices)
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you must renew it for the first time, repeat it once above a little bit, because its saltiness. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical understanding)
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerves, just as we have said, and do likewise for the health of the other piece of flesh. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices)
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The pain in the vein of sciatica is at the ankle, and its health corresponds to the pain in the hunchback when hot blood is involved. (Speculative translation based on medieval understanding)
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its health is that it suffers from bathing and stretches above the ankle by twisting three days. (Speculative translation based on medieval medical practices)
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	lume.deme vaise,tente to lisis 3ecie in whichnkamixume.fèzudecture isso 1stent
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is good to move it so that it heals well, for the skin has come off, and it is much restored by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not move it, so that no part of the one that has broken its back or side shows any sign of improvement, and towards its little door, and drive out the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make such correction in the blood that you see, then loosen the bandage, and place it on cotton and hold tightly; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Vacuum suctions
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Vacuums are made of horns, or goats' skin, or wood; and suction is performed according to these methods: either by making an incision and drawing out the blood, or by pressing on it.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction that is done through cutting is according to these methods: either completely with fire, or with fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and suction made by incision and blood extraction is done in three parts on the shoulder joint.
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	for this reason one lies at its top; and the other around the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and in other places on the chest; and the vacuum between the mouth.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the vacuum on the wrists; and the vacuum on the knees.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the vacuums on the arms; and the vacuums on the legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the vacuums on the ankles; and this suction does not treat with blood, but small veils that are spread out over the skin.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	"misture la terre. XXI'saint toilet le monde, cetera, illetre: it isle I'vellatcestry of the French. Theil invoicedent'sansent. Itan:nous. Laocurrir:lalmoste :
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it does not need to be anointed, nor with fire or feeling of heat, in any disease that comes from excessive filling, as long as all the limbs are free.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if for necessity of diseases it needs to be expelled, or by habit, we administer each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and between every ten days.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are such ones who, when they need to be expelled, have a significant weight.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are such ones who experience fullness and swelling in their body, in the head, neck, and face, and darkness in their eyes.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and such ones who have a drop of blood in their mouth, whose tongue has fallen out, and reabsorb the blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such ones who think about it, and see their body filled with blood, wounds, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and immediately after the end of the month, we order to expel it every three hours during the daytime.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the mouth helps to relieve the pressure that goes up into the head, and it does not need to be done after evacuating all its blood.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this expulsion is related to the health of the head.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not need to be done for those who have a cold constitution or who suffer from catarrh, because this causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for that reason it does not need to be done during the night or those who have cold diseases affecting their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal from it often become weak, and therefore they should place the pump slightly further downwards due to uncertainty of action.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The expulsion from the neck is related to the health of the head and the throat, and for that reason it has an effect on swelling.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and in an opening of the channel where food is released from, and sputum, and fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and to hold lightly because if it holds too tightly, it may cause reflux or indigestion in the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The expulsions from the two corners of the neck are worth the pains in the head and eyes, conjunctivitis, stiffness, strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and is related to the health of the throat; it requires that you command the surgeon that he makes him express his hand when putting it on, that he does not cut an artery, and does not draw blood from a wound.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The expulsions from the mouth are related to diseases of the mouth and the decay of gums, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is related to the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The expulsions from the spine are related to a disease that comes from dampness and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The dislocations of the shoulders are worth as much as three arrows from the arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and commands the surgeon that he should not inflict too much harm upon it, for its skin is thin over bones and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction device placed on the back is worth as much as marrow and diseases from that area; it must be large, hooked, and made of iron so that it can properly treat; and in any case, if it were too subtle, it would break; and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are worth opening wide because they draw blood from all parts of the body; they are equivalent to old wounds caused by rain and mudslides, as well as kidney stones and bladder infections; and they weaken the muscles throughout the entire leg, causing multiple complications.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put the suction device is by initially emptying it and using it continuously, moving quickly and evenly, without stopping as long as you see the skin reddened and swollen, and when the blood clot starts to form in the vein; then remove the cups and secure them in a position that accommodates the body's contours because there are those who have thin or fragile bones, and clear pores: it must be done once only, causing large wounds and some deep scars; and suction slowly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is large, it can cause injury twice: the first time by making a smaller cut through the larger vein more subtly.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is too thin, it must cause injury the third time; and when we draw a little bit of blood from the vein several times, we sometimes suffer an accidental injury on one occasion.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we draw a lot of blood, we often find; and if the suction device is too thin, it must be reshaped many times; and when it has been handled so much, in the end it remains broken, and its shape can no longer be clearly discerned.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it must be given to the one who has thick skin and firm, that you anoint with oil and dissolving agent.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is so, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or oil of seed of squash;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is so, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take bitter oil, or balm of Gilead, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if that which is healthy has tender and wide joints, it does not require the application of oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it requires washing after the aspiration of warm water, or cold water, or water of marshmallow, or squash water, or ceramic water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, they should rise up by air, or warm water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with large excesses should rise up by strong wine or water of honey, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	but it does not require the use of suction before or during bathing, but afterward for an hour or two; and it should not sleep immediately following aspiration.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is required that he be warmed up when he needs suctioning and when he is moist.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And it is required that those who are quick-tempered be warmed up, and if they are not too hot or inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	provided that he receives cold things, as if apples turned into stones and red onions and lettuces in the air.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And blend pea protein shakes, and lean meat, and moist meats. In a non-invasive treatment option for obstructive sleep apnea, the text might include dietary supplements that address potential health risks associated with it.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold constitution, they should take honey syrup and strongly scented wine, which is between warm and cool, and wash with water little, and wash small birds and baby lambs and peacock feathers.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And the day when it will regain movement, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is meant that one should never give any patients triakines or musk before or after inflammation, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And it must not be taken without, but it does not say that those who are hot should not drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are applied for wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and in gouty patients, and on the abdomen, and on swelling and rheumatism, because these members do not suffer from injury under them.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And it does not happen that they do this for drawing blood from one limb into another.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	As we do to the breasts when they are not sick, to oppose the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the abdomen and swelling to lessen the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And it causes pain when there is an operation or incision, if the pain attracts by chance the operation, or deprives the wound of its blood.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And in this way it is done when they place them on the liver and kidneys when there is retained viscosity.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these cups are used as empty vessels to suck so much; and sometimes they are used together by fire, and others filled with water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	As in diseases with heavy sweating, and so they fill the cup with hot water, or hot water boiled with leaves that are useful for such cases.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cup used by fire is so:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it is wide and half-sleeve of length three fingers, and at the base of the arm; and put out an arrow in:
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	During this time.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	in theire àte ope kills (12ndail. Ipsum, of theemails:ingle:
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And they shall be both great and small according to the diseases and the symptoms of those who have them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's suction cups are different from adult ones, and thin people are not like fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And it must be placed upon this limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the candle or oil-soaked cloth, and place it across the forearm where the suction cup is located.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	If the light shines at the base of the suction device, it will not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it upon the limb as we have mentioned, and you must do so above the puncture that we have spoken of. When looking at it, if there is a vapor coming out, or when pressure is applied to it, remove the suction device.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And apply it similarly as was done previously, and repeat often if you are skilled in doing so.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction device which is administered for pleurisy, in all acute cases, there is no vein nor puncture involved, and it is only applied when the patient has a clear pulse of fluid, and it is placed on the limb as briefly as possible.
et c’est li forme:	And it is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction devices are not applied to small parts where it is difficult to place suction cups, like the lips and gums, as with the teeth.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And in small parts that are detached from the body as with hairs or nails, and other similar things.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the quality of using it so that when you remove suction cups on soft and slight pains as they come.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And they put a nail gently, so it is long and slender, until they are fully grown, and have no contents in the womb.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then you must know about venesection and suction, after which you should rub the limb as red as possible, and place it on moss.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they become smooth and pleasing in appearance, if it can be suctioned, then you should apply the suction, because this is very beneficial afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the limb's edge upwards and then wet it well, which is quite beneficial, and then draw blood from it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the limb's edges are too cold after taking blood from them, then take a piece of cool linen and place it on top, until the moss has been absorbed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple pieces of moss, then place broken glass or pills on it, and similar things, as long as the limb remains cold.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you should place some scalding water on almost burnt flour near the edge of the limb, and let it sit until the moss begins to adhere. Then it will be securely fixed.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more experience with it, then take other mosses.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the mosses do not cling to it, then you should rub the limb with fresh blood or stick an awl into the dislocated joint until it stops moving.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then you should place them on it so that they feel the warmth of their own blood, and if they adhere to it;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them bleeding again, then powder it with a little aloe and ashes or charcoal; they will be better off now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	And this begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	And these chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they relate to treatment of fractures and displacement.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	s ithicion.soathe morecifere andagrecther ​ive subtrunge himentifferreveignesse:nècthei orkithescheursevelices thatxcretifiante,crains,as heure anatomye. fromable.bissecanssecane ia
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason is extraction made here in our land, because I found none better.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, for by the ancient books' science that I have studied so much that I understand its science, and by experience, and by the customs of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the animals that are intended, as I did in these preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore we must say in this book's prologue the contents of words and chapters or sections that he sets his understanding, and delays on various occasions so that those who have practiced can see and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a dislocation or torsion or twist comes to any kind if it requires you to tend to the maladies of one side and another, so as not to neglect anything, whether it be weakness in the body, or fever, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Or if he holds it not too tightly or too cold; and menchiefs of frozen ice are to be known as icy fights, and hawk'its and arrows, and does not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and does not fill himself too much with food that fills the cavities with blood, until he is sure there is no doubt in removing the arrow, or expansion of matter in the limb; then let him regain previous governance which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it requires that you feed the malady with fatty meats that make a loud noise of digestion, or they have viscosity like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and pike fish, and bread made from various grains, and oily things, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and suchlike.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the noise of digestion represents faster healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that a broken bone of old age and weakness cannot be properly restored or joined according to the nature of limb joints, nor those who are too soft, like the bones of little children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not repair the broken bone with a large tendon that will heal and join the limb together, so long as it has strength like before; and for this reason you must feed him with fatty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the main fracture is different from that of the hip or leg, and I will describe in this chapter all kinds of broken bones.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go downward like the writing end of a quill, and others where it is lengthened, as with a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with wound, and a break on all a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every way it has its design, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes into his mind.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is considered the bone fracture due to its twisted shape, and opened well by force, and pressed with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And if there is no twisting and the pain does not arise from such manipulation, then it has no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may well have twisting, or crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not require you to move the limb by hand, but apply remedies that come after this treatment, and then maintains it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you know the fractures that are aligned side by side, and their separated parts he must now align them evenly, so as not to pierce veins.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if pierced veins it comes, so that there is no harm done as long as the punctures are calmed down.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then he aligns the parts that you can move and adjust lightly and knows that the restoration of it is easier than its previous state or having separated parts. Then the restriction, as required afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are pieces broken off, whether it is taken from two parts, or by hand, or of some small limb, or from strings, or from a string and your own hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And set the member according to its natural shape, if when the two members are displaced, and restores by all means in their limbs the additions that you can make so that they do not move too much your body.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And well set together the two shoulders of bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if the hand feels well to you if it seems not very well: if it moves gently and does not squeeze too much, and not as those who do it with their work bring about a hot and tightening of the limb, as we have seen many times before.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at a certain point, if it is properly set for the patient so that it does not move while awake or asleep, turning back and forth, in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And take good care that the limb is securely set so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, then it is not at the right place, and it must be put in a state where it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And keep it straight so that twistedness does not occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of a broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken limbs are varied in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For they have small members like bowls, pots, and other similar things; it must be wrapped in soft linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are big, like boots and legs; it must be wrapped in a large but tough bandage, because the wide bands encompinas the whole great member, and the pressure is distributed evenly, so that there is no trouble.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind the bandage tightly around moving limbs, two or four turns depending on the member, and wrap your hand all around it, then raise the injury above the break and loosen a little so that the break moves away from the point.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And loosen the bandage a little and a little until you secure a large part of the healthy limb, then apply another bandage, turning it back towards the injured area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part above the break, and tighten it moderately, not too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first line upward.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place pieces of linen or soft cloths between the bandages so that they are evenly distributed, then tie one more bandage over it, and put your supports well placed, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, place something soothing with hot compresses to reduce it and relieve the pressure, allowing time for recovery.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch the supports and make them from a piece of wood with a wide cut to fit the size, or sticks used for making hurdles, or palm branches according to this shape.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it must be a support that is slightly larger and wider than the others placed on the break.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And it must also be long enough, as it is required for small members or large ones.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	And then binds of this text.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is narrower then again, and it must be that the thread be made thin, not too thick nor too fine, and of linen soft.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, as I have seen works of folk who make their linen cordages twisted crookedly, and it is great fault, for the turn cannot be equal when it is too fine, and there is no need that between each pair of layers there should be less than double its width.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient's wounds are torn by the threads after stripping them off their healthy tissues, then you should put on them pieces of linen or rags so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with fragmentation and the crust is torn, I will tell you the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it does not need to stretch all members broken out at first by the day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when members are large, there is no need to insert threads until after several weeks or years, or more depending on your judgment as an expert in the art of incision.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And now the way of ancient splints for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting: make sure to use flour that is found on millstone walls, mixed with a lot of water, and form this mixture neither too clear nor too thick, then apply it, as it is the common method of splinting used for treating various conditions, especially women and small children, because it's not too hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to splint for restoring fractures and dislocations and twisting: take barley flour and boiled water and vinegar and gum Arabic and 10 grams; mirrèd honey, 5 grams; aloe vera, 7 grams; and make powder, mix the flour with a lot of water. If the patient's complexion is warm, use this splint, because it has good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of splinting for torsion: take gum Arabic and wheat flour, 10 grams; mirrèd honey, 7 grams; aloe vera, 6 grams; acacia water, 5 grams; Armenian bole, 10 grams; crush well, mix with a lot of water or water mixed with flour, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of splinting for dislocations and loose joints, and to ease the pain arising from it, and cut with bone, and fracture: take new linen, soak in oil and heated water, and place on the joint. These splints do not restore completely, but they are good for alleviating hot asthma attacks, and properly treat joint pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of splinting that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and dried earthy leaves, crush them together, and make a splint with it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Amenurre ceste maniere: et siens pourpreyse por les poincture desgothesque la peche. Etude, andre malheures ysans, eterisane leuces, seyte thegeants comise a itel alii lexpresents :victims deit:age in French: tounigene Iones :wars,
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	:meble:sure (butter theater tok. The itacountemese often:0lyseablexte the fudecte:represseuille.dement. Andre apeartessex amile tècumens. Inse enjentax, ansexe.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	There is in his book nothing written about putting on the broken limb to restore it because of charcoal and oil, and no other thing more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to the Galen that one should put on the broken limb, to restore it, with slightly dry things heated a bit, like myrrh and aloes and incense, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to emplasty that is worth for injury and pain: take a mud and clay of men's skins cut off in pieces, or bird feathers, and shake them evenly, and grind them into dust, and crush them so they break, and with this mixture make an emplasty and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then the dislocation should be slightly afterward, and take care that the patient's painful limb has no new pain or movement in his bones; if not done by hand day by day.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the bone, or itching, restlessness, swelling, hurry and dislocate it again, and osteal the emplasty now; take a light drape, and moist sea sponge, and immerse in water, and lift the limb up until the itching stops, and be relieved of the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, and lay it on linen dry, moistened in water or oil roses, and bind it securely until you are free from any danger of dislocation.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of either member be reduced, and alleviate the pain, then resume the dislocation gently, and apply a little emplasty, and not strain it as much as before, and do so subtly until he is sound again.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if the dislocation and twisting and pain and swelling are increased in either limb, and you have need of emplasty and binding, then when it is renewed, as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if none of this comes to the member in question as we have said before, dislocate it again after .iij. days or .iiij. or .v. or .vij.; and never leave him for .xx. days according to what is seen, so that his breaking returns and approaches the previous displacement.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	therefore the restraint is more than before, and his flesh swells as I have said before; and if you see the limb healed too much, it shows that nothing can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	"and if the dislocation is cold, and in hontes demeinage enceinsentil leu dame.llois entendebleau seille d’e. Il sut.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	sesla. In thexere. Whater itinjacer. Iforlater. The:
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of dislocation
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of dislocations are therein, and various forms, and the causes have been distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for it has dislocations caused by the impact of a sword strike, and his collarbone breaks along the entire bone just above where it lies on the adjacent bone, as we see in cutting or beheading; hence this type of dislocation is called "haichure."
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword penetrates beyond sense by piercing, and it brings about this type of dislocation "absolute," and there is wound from these injuries, whether large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has been struck by blunt force, or broken bone or clavicle, or falls on the bone, or other similar incidents.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent dislocation that approaches the tissue just above or below the bone, or it's under the bone, and whether this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is repaired within the bone as subtly as small cracks, and it's a tiny fracture, thus this type of dislocation is called "capillary."
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is caused by stabbing with an iron, falling, or any such thing, and it inserts a piece of bone inside as if done by a blacksmith when forging between anvils, where there is insertion within the interposed bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more often under where there are moist bones, as with those of children.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and happens to all these dislocations where the fragments are lightly displaced as they are in their proper place, and I will speak of it hereinafter.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	: "it's. In thewoman itentence to iawould (it, andre. Andromme.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	nichel �an  thean hevelle de haitile. justifyiable for mattercheurrefaye:galleuxkitholdescusexholding
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the bad patient, and if you see no serious harmful accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, stretching, paleness of hands, fever with ague, emergence and reddening of hairs in various other conditions, then one cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see an apparently harmless accident, and hope for salvation, as the commencement of treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navel comes first to you, and it is in winter, there remains for thee to fast for forty days that thou mightest heal thy bones.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if 'tis a time, then thou must hasten the healing of thine bones before the seventh day, so that the swelling above thy bone be diminished and therewith come forth those calamities which we have spoken of.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And should the break of the bone occur just where it encircles the brain, it is requisite that thou cleave the affected segment in this manner: and thou must endeavor to discern the chief afflicted nerve-endings, and investigate all over the fragmented bone, as well as the tender part of the wound.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the discharge of blood appears at the discovery of the bone or during an incision, then it is essential that thou aid this with what is requisite, and cover thy wound with cloths moistened in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest so long as the incision is pacified; then assure thyself of no further discharge of blood; thereupon commence to break the bone according to .ij. manners of operation: one manner being that thou copest with a precise cutting into the narrow area before, and it takes this form...
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there is another treatment more significant than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method whereby thou hast a variety of different ones long and narrow, and pointed, and made of iron; and by degrees, that thy neck does not hurt thee.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and brittle, it requires that you pierce through its center so well that nothing goes beyond the bone's edge, ensuring there is above the tip of the bone a margin or circle, preventing anything from passing over the bone; and you must have several more, so that each limb stays in place between the ends of the bone, and you should use torment for all three parts. And this is the form of the three manners:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing the bone so that you place one torment on it and turn at both ends until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the torment to another place a little while later, and thus proceed all around, then take the incisors along the length of the bone that is between the punctures, and do this more subtly than we have said, lightly and swiftly, as we mentioned, until you bring the bone back to your hand or any other instrument you use for this purpose, such as pincers. And be careful not to touch the brain or spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, provided that you resuspend the detachment from the bone with every instrument seeming like an incisor but must be more pliant and subtle than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there is no delay in removing small bones or scales, then lightly apply pressure with one of these tools and treat the wound with ointments that we have mentioned before.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of this work is what they call "saus," as Galen has said, and it works very well, according to his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It must first be revealed a part of the bone where there is an open fracture, and when you have revealed that piece, then put on the edge of this circular incisor accordingly; thus, its shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut it into parts and make the piece in two sides, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then with a small hammer held above, lightly hit the bone all around, taking care of the cloth undernee.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, then hit lightly because the bone does well not to hurt itself and cause fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through the cloth and the bone is cut only upwards, then there are small pieces; in this case, it must be retouched again to create roughness, and remove scales using a delicate scraper of various sizes, so as to provide each limb with the most suitable covering according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If before great rasps, then after more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other type of cutting and subtle fracture it is required to prepare according to its improvement; and this is something that has not been recorded by the one who mastered this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the skull is exposed, it requires a piece of linen clothed in proportion to the size of the wound and the oil dresse .ii.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	ilion. Iij. The French:re ceillion theure. Ilion:les. Celture andire. It:3s. il. It:isrelentures. AIr the.i :interpret ito: Ioncelesurine.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	nagerece. Withoutes. Thex012itude.lorejorne congermeatisse apeaudecte que cece,sse. Amanglore:sse coudre laissez siage if their sages andentifressecette,dè ceasse.ceste
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and command that the wound be thoroughly cleaned, so you do not allow any oozing or clotting, because when a bite strikes upon the tablecloth of the brain, it will harm and injure greatly; for when something sharp is placed on top of the surface, if it pierces through excessively.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed that anyone who comes to the patient may cause doubtful doubt, as we have said before.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come forth due to the medicine that has been applied, then there must be a part of honey placed on it, and three parts of rose oil mixed with one part of olive oil, and laid upon its surface.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of methods that he must cover until he is healthy again.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that at times the two joints above are broken, or one after another, for they are bones; and these below are cartilage-covered, and do not break, if not pulled or twisted, and then he will be healthy again.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two joints is broken, it must be drilled or pierced through both sides of that joint and place that fracture in the same index finger, and on the pad thereafter, so long as its joint returns to a natural state.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	sawf theudre,ceteria:severable:50re (96213esculiere and itaccomenture it coudrecte of age:nagainsteille:troi.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	ssexent de ceille apecex200sement.ume benjacourtifle theescribe:nsoffer 10xile,terc laisseurdecteuconsecsseurrevesurdecturecturellastelangexatil:mountestrux a materriel, to demprecthevocesseives.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, you repair it again, and hasten to restore it in its first year, if you can do so.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But after the seventh or the eighth time when the abscess cavity is calmed down, then cut at the head of the stone a piece of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you cut another piece if the fracture is in two parts; and make the cloths so large that they fill up the cavities of bones.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And the master restorers said that they must stuff them with moss, and renew them every day; it seems to me that this is not quite right, but it must be made by fashioning moss of heath and powdered mill-stone; then let the cloth remain until the bone has hardened and the cartilage become tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And there is never any time when one places the feather of an ostrich in the cloths around the fracture, and if a swollen piece of linen gets caught, and holds the broken part and blows away the pain; or make what you will for seeing it.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess cavity comes to the bone as you work on it, then put some coating or padding soaked in rose oil, or a little of diatomaceous earth.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscess cavity does not come to the bone, then apply plaster by default using flour of selenite (salt), and powdered incense mixed with heather moss, laid under hot coals, and do not bind the bone.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the two fragments of bone are small and broken into tiny pieces, then you set them with corresponding staples or bindings as they were to it, then repair the fracture, and treat the joints in various ways, and joining them together as you would fix a wound with bandages and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there's no injury in the bone, then take care of it with bandages and let them be wrapped around until they are sound.
de la routure de la mandibule	Celt. Itinjur thewinter:celte. Then :nascue: "décisimorice.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is moved sideways and it has no wound that can be healed, and the fracture is so small that it is not even considered in two places, because there are spaces between them, if you know how to move it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is required that if the fracture is in the right part of the jaw, you put your thumb in the patient's mouth on the sore side; and if the fracture is in the left part of the jaw, you put your right thumb on the injury and move it gently, and rest the other hand for later use, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in a manner where it's asymmetrical, it requires that you apply a symmetrical extension to the affected area until it becomes equal again.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if compression occurs due to density, or when using threads of gold, silver, or silk straps, place the fractured jaw on the strap and put upon it one double sheet; and place upon this sheet a large, well-made tablecloth or a piece of leather long and wide according to the size of the jaw, positioning it where the patient can sit comfortably, and instruct the patient that they must rest, and command them to eat lightly.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you observe that the patient's condition changes, and then realign it to its original state, and place therein powder from a flour mill mixed with abundant flour or millet bran after dressing the fracture; and lay on top of this mixture thin linen, and as the linen dries, leave the patient's position until their condition remains stable, which often takes three months.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a stone arises during the operation, as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, repair it with the smallest piece of bone from another part in its place; if the replacement bone pieces are not easily obtainable.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to its necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have acquired all these bone pieces, and it does not delay the wound, if she is wide, in this way, si comande il n'amainement; la:esme de .ij. ices desfaire li ence ielit ceu lou fracture que se pointe dits of ainsaid in .iij.
de la forcele	itiinjour: "bouttejacquatre methanique thecaur:ite dexaint, leavver. Ifacee :nun fromage:faitis's.de.il (14ctajoritice dextract. Howl'sage.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The little break occurs several times before the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways: or it is cracked and displaced in two parts, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore it; or it has a fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the measures are when the fracture is with wound, that you have two instruments, so that one twists the splint where it feels the forceful crack; and the others extend the col towards the part; then equalize the fracture in your places, so that it forms as it should, and there is neither appearance nor healing.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, put on the patient's shoulder a rounded stick of cloth or linen according to your necessity; and they are soft on the fracture, and hold the stick with their hand, putting it in equal measure as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the splint to the front because it comes off by itself, then it is necessary that the patient lies down on his bedridden position, and put one earring under the shoulder; and place two instruments at the back of the shoulder, so long as the bone of the fracture rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the fracture in your places, and if you find loose pieces, it is necessary that you cut them away; and break up the smaller fragments lightly, and when the bone cannot join for any reason, take one of the incisors that you have; but put this tool under the splint to keep its shape:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and seems like a spoon, and is not uneven, and it is also wide as the bone requires, according to its size and your skill; and you have two sticks, if you see how they are large and which one should be thinner, so that they match the pattern of the wound in the bone when you treated it when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of the fracture's position, if it is open wound, or if you doubt its position, then assess the wound; and if the break is small, or if there is any doubt about the location, cover it with layers of fabric and tenting according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the fracture comes out, then wrap it with one rag dipped in oil and vinegar and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when it is sensing wounds and feeling sutures, is that you put on the splint with powdered flour and charcoal dust, and place lightweight pins over it, if you know how to do so.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large band of one palm in width, and place double pins on top of it, and the splint; then take a slender stick two dozens long and wide, and wrap it around that band, making sure that the head of the splint remains hanging.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the band around the patient's collarbone, and under both healthy and dislocated shoulder joints, and make sure of each part; and when you see that the piece holds the fracture in place well, and clearly see that the splint does not move upward from the bone, then rewrap it every day and keep a tight hold on it whenever the band slips.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And let the patient with the arm rest on his back, and when it sleeps a little pin underneath the splint to lift the shoulder apparatus upwards; this will alleviate the strain from the splint by adjusting the shoulder position, or bind the arm to the collarbone, and avoid any misalignment accidents that may occur within twenty years.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then resume the splint if you have seen that it is necessary, and keep the tension and leave it in place as long as the arm is restored; and within twenty-seven years, ideally not at all for any person.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the fracture of the shoulder blade
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It is rare for the shoulder blade fracture or dislocation not to move at all, and they do not have foreign objects within them due to the impact; if you examine it according to the shape of the break, and treat with a bandage made from powdered flour mixed with charcoal dust, and lightweight pins placed over it; then wrap another thin stick about twice as wide around that support, in any way you can; then tightly bind the shoulder firmly, so that the splint does not move away from the bone'rom. Then observe whether the bandage is loose or not, if the dislocation has occurred, and adjust it again, and keep it still, as it should be aligned, since these many years: twenty-seven or twenty-five; And when this number of them is complete, then release, and you are sure, for they are no longer bound.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes before, and does not fall down from the joint, they make it up again, and bone and flesh, and do as we have said in treating an arm fracture with heat.
de la brisure dou pis	From the breakage... (The incomplete sentence needs more context to provide a meaningful translation).
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The bone is never broken in an accident but it does happen occasionally; however, when it is broken elsewhere, it declines to its original position, causing the patient great pain and injury without other apparent cause, sometimes vomiting blood, and opening a wound in the broken bones, where the discomfort is very severe.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration consists of applying a hot iron between the shoulders, then pressing the shoulders together, and assembling one or two strips to both sides of the ribs with your hands, very gently in all manners until the bone's figure is as it should be; then place heating plates above the salty cautery spot, or another faster agent, and wrap the patient in a cloth over the hot caustic on the broken bone so that the dislocation does not move. Then turn the ligament back to its original position, and attend to it hour by hour; if it relaxes, you should also attend; and if it requires unbinding due to corrosion or pruritus at the joint site, pain, or abscess, then hurry up, unbind that area, and refer to those who are skilled in various treatments of injuries; then remove the hot iron.
de la brisure des costes	From the breakage of the ribs... (The incomplete sentence needs more context to provide a meaningful translation).
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breakage of the ribs does not occur because their large parts are located behind the back and in front of it, but rather because they are fragile due to being covered with frost, and it causes considerable discomfort during examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration consists of placing the breakage similarly; and then apply the heating plate, and bind with a thin stick if you have experience in this method.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inside, it causes the patient great pain and trouble, similar to pleurisy; because the bone does not have enough tissue on its surface, which leads to frequent bleeding from wounds, serious injuries, and those who used to treat this were very knowledgeable.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are some who say that it must be administered with foods that swell the stomach to push the breakage back in place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do such things; unless the abscesses come on their own accord.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they come, they are healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that there is no harm in applying hot plates on the joint, to help it seem so; wholly, for fear that the weaknesses of position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said none of us must cover the wound with moist linen in hot oil, and put a tent between the sides to place the inflamed area, then treat for pleurisy, meat consumption and medicines.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear on the bone which does not cover his wound, and there is doubt in the patient about it, then they must cut under the loose side of the rib cage, and put something to hold open its opening; and therefore one must saw the bone, and drain lightly, and then suture the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplastries, until he is well. And when a chest wound comes in, you must place moist linen on top of him covered with hot oil rosette, and put something under his rib cage; and attend to the opening of the chest cavity as needed, and for such patients either they lie down upon the costal area or where he should be, until he is well.
de la brisure dou col	from the fracture in the sternal region
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There has never been mentioned a fracture of the sternal bone, and it hardly happens that he bends; also at the spinal column of the back. This statement suggests rarity or lack of reference to severe chest injuries involving either sternum (dou col) or thoracic vertebrae (espinee dou dos), implying these events are not common occurrences in medical practice as described within this text.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to none and you know whether he will be well or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and cold, and they cannot move nor extend; when you touch them with a needle, it does not feel good. You realize that he is in multiple conditions, and if he is silent and feels good after being pulled and without any movement, then you know the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient's pain has been treated, provided you apply such treatment. This passage emphasizes the importance of assessing a patient's condition by examining physical signs (softened hands, cold temperature) and responses to stimuli (pain response upon needle touch). The outcome—whether or not the bone joint is safe and if pain relief has been achieved—guides further medical intervention.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when such cases come to the spinal vertebrae, and you know whether he is well or not; if his legs are softened, and there are accidents in them (implying possible paralysis), and ascertain whether he has any involuntary movements upon his back's ventrality and excretion; when it is known on him from the abdomen, does he have voluntary movement for excretion? And when he is strained over his spine and wants to sit down, he cannot. You realize that such a patient is mortal: if there is no labor in its treatment. The text discusses challenges associated with potential spinal injuries—evidenced by symptoms like involuntary movements, difficulty or impossibility of movement (indicating paralysis), and the broader context of these signs indicating a grim prognosis if there is no progress in recovery during treatment. This passage illustrates the severity of spinal injuries and their implications for patient outcomes, highlighting how critical assessments are to determine effective management strategies.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then it is a lighter matter. This statement suggests that the absence of certain injuries or complications (implied by "cist accident," which likely refers to severe injury) makes the situation less serious, with potentially fewer health concerns and perhaps easier management and recovery. The context here emphasizes that minor accidents may not significantly alter prognosis or treatment approach in a medical setting, allowing practitioners more straightforward interventions for patient care during their healing process.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	:meant. Leu desors mea: " Theodice que les cheyre. La. Sumer asin'sis in Frenchie antique theobtrofthief. Tyme of aingles. Allstitve: Whatwout of thec:es:rather :meantil laire. Itafe, and thense:esure, Iber,compre (Latin'smaine: itoftime:age: The- ǒfaire inesta istofy
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone comes loose, it must be covered over the joint; and set the bone, then join together its two sides (if they are large), with a suture, then heals the wound by irrigation, until it is healthy; and if the shoulder sockets are fractured, which we call "joints of the cow", then you throw your pouch in your left hand, and place it in your right hand for your aid, then apply the splint and the crutch, as long as you know how to do it; then fasten, and if the bone has come loose, he does so, and treats the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Rarely does the hip bone get fractured, and if it does, it's merely a slight reduction at its top; he then stretches out long, and declines to the hips, and comes into the painful spot at the side of the patient's body, and swelling appears where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as much as you can reach the fracture; and know what kind of fracture and its shape is; and if the fracture is at the top naturally, then keep the same type of fracture until it has a natural appearance.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it declines to the sides, then let the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that fracture has been achieved.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it in the same position, then place it on a wooden or metal barrest, and fasten it with an iron bracket, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and use the left hand along its sides, until the ligament is stable.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient that he rests on his healthy side or backside.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess comes out in an incision, do not touch it, as long as the abscesses are calmed down, and place it where we have said before; then return to the restoration, and tighten so that he must as much as is necessary, unless there has been no other accident. And this is how one does it.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the fractured brace:
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder-girdle is this which lies between the head and neck of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of these two methods: as there was a particularly swollen joint in that manner.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And there are two joints in these ligaments, and they extend upwards, and see the malady under that roof; then he breaks his arm so as it lies on the stem, until it bends at the elbow, and puts a wrench of wood onto it, which makes him hold it with any weighty thing or extends it downwards below; and place the break equally in both hands together, so long as the break returns to how it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that they believe the disease lies within its tendons, and hold the limb by the collarbone, then instruct two assistants to each touch the fracture in both hands while others move it along every ligament, extending it to its respective part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction seems further advanced, then constrain one of the ligaments around the fracture and under it, and extend them with the helpers from different sides; and if the fracture is near the head of the scapula, then he must place a limb within the shoulder socket, and another towards its edge below the fracture; and if the fracture is toward the scapular head, it requires him to gently press with these helpers along the line of labor, ensuring that the break remains level under the body and at the joint's edge. And similarly, he must place the dislocation equally below its location, and restrain it so that no other movement occurs until the displacement returns to how it should be.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the dislocation recurs, one should not extend it further than a few years, and place it in an upright position with moistened bandages on both sides and above, until these movements are relieved; then apply pressure again, and the method of applying this extension involves placing the splint on the fracture site, assembling the arm onto the splint, and placing one hand on the shoulder or breastbone (sternum); and put a covering, and press the splint, and the arm, so that the arm is elevated with some support under it, provided no external factors interfere or if there are not movements in the bone.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	iveuises:loreffectifiere  sengesseuse
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the stones, and the stretching, as we have said, when restoring the broken member, and you doubt the incision is hot, let it stay tied for seven days, as we have said; then observe in each three years that no swelling grows near the seat, or the dislocations come to the limb because it is too stiff. If so, if as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur within three years or more, and the pain remains on his back, and in his hands above his stomach; and lay one simple linen cloth evenly over the aid, and observe every hour for two days whether the misaligned joint does not move or become softened, if it occurs by virtue of medicine and gives flesh as we have mentioned before, so that the meat is first slightly broken down; and when starting to recover, if it becomes heavy. And it is customary for the aid and leg to be recovered in forty years each; and therefore you must untie and administer baths and medicines on his skin to soften the joint. And if the tightness is ugly and swollen, let it stay untied for one year or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the arm breakage (fracture)
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones called the "double-humped" one (probably referring to the humerus), where one is small and serves as the socket for the pouch (likely a reference to the glenoid cavity in the shoulder joint); while the other is large, situated near the smaller depression; consequently, it can break either the larger or the smaller bone of the arm, sometimes even both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones are fractured, recovery is light and healing; but when the large one is broken, it signifies a severe injury, and more dislocated than if they were jointly disrupted. If only the smaller ones are fractured, then little extension should be done gently, and apply equal pressure to them.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	ses dise, ince (1: Cure :en ce morcegas.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage it breaks into pieces, put each piece back to its place, and if there is no displacement of the bone that he holds, and you cannot restore it back to its place, then do so with him and the doctor, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound from the breakage that I mentioned to the individual physician; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration process it sticks at the incision sites, then apply a piece of cotton made from rose oil and beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and slowly place another piece by subtly lifting until the incision sites are calmed. Then apply the medicine to the powder with plenty of wax, putting on plates, and make the plate for the fracture larger than the others, and ensure it has at least two or more joints: whether the fracture is in one bone or another; and tighten above the fracture rather than elsewhere, and do not move it too much each year, as I have said to the individual physician; and make the cotton around which are moist and soft, neither hard nor rough, and tie the bandage made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and the ligament after a few months.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any accident occurs to the limb, as when itching comes to a member, then it is required that you warm the limb with hot water until the itching subsides; and let the limb not be kept in a narrow position. Then resume the traction, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone dislocated, as happens in such cases, so address accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the contraction does not come to the member, because it is too stiff, then it requires that you soften a little bit, and let them rest for some days until the contraction corrects itself, and then resume traction.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said do not occur to the patient, then let them rest for as long as twenty years or less; bind the hands to his collar, and make their collars even, and restrict movement and drainage, and lie on their backs; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty years or more, depending on compositions and temperaments of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and we rarely see such fractures occur, but there are many times when it is simply a flexion injury.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And if the hand's plantar is fractured or flexed, then it requires that you check for crepitus, and lay him down evenly before him; then put his hand on a stretched out towel, and extend the broken bones so they are level; and apply the emplaster and bandages, if there is no movement of the fractures, then make an ellipse according to its size; and wrap it in one layer of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	leuke de laissabe of theorin theplume frome. Iface kills wither itkne theore tokes. Fromage frommeans in a formule, sockle :pourint: Fromage fromles thek: "kisse:esque l'en le:
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the foot, it must be that you place a stretcher above, and another under the sole of the foot, so that the hands are upright and right, then bind the limb tightly between the two with an unyielding band.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not belong to one of our two sides, if it is in the pouches, place it so as it must; and tighten with the sole, and when you see a small straight stretranor to elevate the fracture, making sure it does not move; and if the fracture is on the other side, like in the index or one of the others, put it similarly, and bind them all together so that they hold firmly, or place them on an inclined plane, as we do with a pouch; and be vigilant in restoration and positioning at incision, and heed what comes next, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the injured joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the joint is often fractured, and we can see it when she turns in front and back; and restoration should involve two supports: one above the fracture and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the maladies strike his face, then extend each of his bands evenly to its respective place; and it is when the fracture lies within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the joint, place one band toward the elbow and the others around the fracture; also if it's close to the knee, then position some bands next to the kneecap, and others below the fracture; then apply a splint on the bone evenly in both hands until its natural shape is restored, and then set up the traction apparatus, and the band, so that no complications arise.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there are complications, let it calm down first, and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in part method.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is required that you wrap around the fracture with a sturdy double band tied in two or three places above and below; remove the excessively tight, then turn the leg so that the toes are bent at the root of the thigh bone, and place an elevator plank undernee on the thighbone, and put the linen cloths, and tie iselinon entor.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, straighten him out and direct that which comes to him, as we have said many times; and if he has pieces of bone in his hand, it must be extracted with effort, so that he can; and if he cannot, then the joint should be cut open, and the bone removed; and treat him as we have said, until he is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And there has never been a time when the joint was dislocated in such a way that splints were used, as in the shoulder and arm; everything else done for restoration does not affect the patient's severe pain or injury.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you know that the dislocation is restored within one year or less or more, depending on the various conditions of the individual's constitution.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groin area
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	You know that in the groin area there is sometimes a small tear, but it folds many times; and if it tears, it becomes either a fissure or a puncture, and affects all wounds and injuries, and such sensation is well felt.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration if it is to put back what should be restored in its place, as long as it can hold itself together; then bind the joint, and put on a rounded support, if you are skilled with it, and tighten it as it must, then provide all the conditions we have mentioned for other fractures and similar appearances; for each incident, that is what should be restored to him, so long as he is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You know that in the leg there may be two bones, one called "moustel", and the other "fusil"; and all other injuries it causes as it does to the arm; thus restoration is the same as for the arm, and the operations are the same for each.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and he can see well; and turn around him; then make extension, and put on the same thing; but however, this break must be ugly, and there are several pieces that the extension should be less severe and lighter, according to its nature.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	lameinthevellastre formeurrenseunage çoithecournifere ieuche
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of bone so painful
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	From the ankle there is no break, but the bones of such a painful joint never experience fractures and require only slight pressure; and they do not suffer any more severe displacements or movements.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If the bones of such painful joints break, and you observe these bones jutting out against each other; then place your foot on their lower parts as if they were flying, and lift it onto his side so that the bones are raised, then press down firmly until they return to their original position; then apply an envelope of bandages around them at intervals of .5 inches from the joints, and other things you know how to do.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four years passed, if you loosen the bandage, you will find that some bones may become even and those which were broken may have healed.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are no bones to be broken, then restore them as we have previously discussed for the hand; next place a stretcher according to the length of each side, and make it slightly wider than necessary, and then set up the thin cloth that I mentioned earlier on top of it, apply pressure accordingly; if there are two or three, or more bones to be broken, position a stretcher corresponding to its quantity, enveloped in one piece of linen, place it underneath the cloth covering the joint, and ensure that it is properly aligned above the body.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is imperative that you remember the other things we have mentioned about various fractures and accidents; deal with each one accordingly as required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the bone at the point of injury
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bones of a woman'occur, if it is swollen at the back part, then incline her toward the rear, and hold her by the waist; fill the body with cotton as much as an inch thick; then let the cotton come out from within her body until the fracture reforms; and then filling of cotton, forsake for nineteen years or so long.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the shoulder blade is fractured in man or woman, and he restores it as we have said for the bone of the neck; and these new breakages are not hidden from those who study and practice medicine, and understand my book, because the fracture signifies many conditions that lead to recovery: therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vein, when it is fractured, take an eel's gullet and insert it into the vein; then wrap it with linen bandages, leaving it for three or four years until he is cured quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	In case of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is required for those who have a fracture with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the joint aid or similar, that they are cured immediately; and this healing proves what we have said before.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, if you apply vitriol to it, but if you have no other treatment, then start restoring the fracture in that very hour or the following day, as long as there are no abscesses at its base.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear at its base, postpone the restoration until a new day, as long as the abscesses are alleviated, and do not attempt to treat it again within one week or three days because you might cause further harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the fractured bone is discovered to protrude from underneayer clothing, it's required that you handle and adjust your hands with careful moderation in movement.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not allow for positioning equal to your hands, utilize this instrument made of iron, which measures approximately 1.5 or 2.5 feet long; the extent of its application depends on the size of the wound; therefore, it's necessary that you employ either three or four such instruments as required by each case of bone fracture; and whether it is round or slightly elongated in shape, it should not compress the affected limb during your work.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palinque," for the patient's fracture protruding bone is required that the knee joint be placed under the head of the humer. Andresonge of le couleur of the thief, andes tote. La verre the elbow.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, if the tool of an appropriate kind for this purpose is available, whether it be a knife or thread, then examine that which is delayed in the bone's hardness and fine cracks.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, you will know that it is not naturally in its place. If it has been restored to its natural position, then pour one liter of black vinegar solution into it properly; and do not put any medication on the wound or oil that could lead to rot and corruption; then dress the bone after removing the skin covering, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and warn well that the wound should not be stretched with a break; and many times have done this procedure themselves, causing harm to the patient or leading them to death at any time; and make the dislocation more tender and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that it may not heal, as we have said, then relieve the pain at the bone, but do not put bandages on top of them; instead, wrap tightly around with sturdy cloths, and when after one year or two weeks you see the bowstring recoil from the wound, remove what was applied above it in vinegar and apply a healing ointment to the wounds as we have described for similar treatments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must realign the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is fused and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And make sure that the limbs are separated to some extent as if the bowstring runs smoothly along its length.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after a month the patient cannot fuse but returns to being bow-like, realizing that there are small bone fragments, since it is necessary for you to treat the wound with poultice and move all these displaced fragments so as not to cause further pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess or other form of corruption occurs at the bone's surface, you must treat it according to what is stated in this chapter by the author. And when the bone is broken and protrudes from the joint, as with a kneecap or shoulder screw, and similar occurrences in large limbs, do not treat it; for many times patients die due to such treatment, but leave it until it attempts to heal on its own; perhaps after 20 years or more, then care for the wound if you can. If you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	fractures that occur due to moisture.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We have often seen the healing of fractures, especially when it is close to the joint, and it is quite astonishing to see the natural form of the limb; and sometimes patients cannot regain their original mobility.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	:saint lespointe toun 12. Alautre theures lamejacute tostere de:tere : 12. The French (faire.compreintelligence. Whattejac.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb after dislocation
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored and afterwards weakened in its limbs subtly, it may happen for many reasons: because one of them was tied too tightly, not as it should be; or because there were too many ties, and could not move freely at all; or due to numerous arrow wounds; or from excessive movements, not necessarily happening within an hour; or because there is not much blood in the heart, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment for this malady involves feeding it properly and making the heart tender until its size is reduced multiple times; and giving it baths to bring joy and pleasure, then apply pitch on the limb so that it attracts the great pain by drawing out the arrows often from waterlogged wood; and restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A twisted joint following health or recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart again, and the form of the limb becomes ugly, in no way does it return to its natural work: for we do not believe that there should be a complete breakage of a member at once, nor have many people made such things here; and these works are blamed, and can lead to great harm, perhaps even death. However, if the nods (inflammations) and tortures persist freshly, one must raise the limb in hot water, or cook soft herbs like violet leaves, roots, etc., as medicines do; and make a mild disintegrator, similar to good honey, and take musk of violets, confit with fat from a pig or oil of sesame, and apply the preparation on top; or take figs greased with fines (fines are likely a scribal error) of colon, and grind them as medicinal remedinas to alleviate stiffness.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And there is nevertheless bone injury for constant and prolonged rubbing of the limbs with wet hands. And every hour, make room for movement in the joint.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is aged and hardened as wood, so too, and it needs to be smithed subtly on the blade, and put in his place of treatment:
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is derived from none of its joints, for it cannot move because of that, and it has misaligned limbs, and feels the patient great pain and significant injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes from none, it must now aim to return with targeted attention.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if it delays, the swelling grows, and perhaps by chance he puts pins on its joints; for there is no reason to move him now that he has grown swollen: many times brought forth rashes and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happened, let the sick patient be made lighter, then leave them as long as their pain at the point of incision subsides; next raise the inflamed limb with hot water and oil, then quickly reset it, and attend to each member as they will need in their joint.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I ordered the chapters of dislocations to be written about these subjects as well.
des mandibules	of jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is rare for the jaws to be dislocated inside and out; the dislocation of both mandibles depends on: or they are a few bones of their teeth, and softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part of the face, and obstructing the saliva from the mouth that it cannot retain, nor close its mouth, and covers its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by various arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset hurriedly without targeting.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a manner that the servant cuts the chief of the sick person's beard with one hand on the root of the dislocation inside the mouth where the dislocation is from part .ij., and the other hand defends it, to make it equal; and orders the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them in all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the master makes it equal, so long as she returns to her joint.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is gripped, immediately it are the .ij. mandibles together, with hot water and oil, let them be moved lightly; not to target the returning, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	Theodre develesse. Etude of ous desgaule morne lesurant surgeaudsis decoitadiexelentures duche.nce:ingledeputy adame en Latin. Isoldesque acreveintraining iton.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient lies heavily on his back, and his teeth are between two fingers, not moving left or right, nor attempting to mix, but rather soft meat, until the pains have eased and the jaws are closed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then he cuts what he wants quickly, and does not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well closed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two teeth cannot be set to point within an hour and are not converted back to their original position, then they may come with familiar fevers and abdominal pains, and sometimes even diarrhea or vomiting all at once.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see that, then you know it is a loss; and many times have died those who experienced it in seven years.
de la forcelle	of the forceps (note: this term might be more accurately translated to "instrument" or "tool," given its use in medical contexts)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The instrument cannot raise anything between the sides of it and below, and is never released thereafter, and certainly he feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down heavily on his back, extends his arms, and then presses the wound firmly with your hand, which returns; then places it on the pillow and binds the limb, and straightens.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the teeth that are towards the side cannot be moved; if they do not move at all, and if they have never been released thereafter, then press it with your hand as we said before, place on the pillow and bind the limb, straighten it, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and at this time we bring back the teeth of the palate when they are displaced from their position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation (note: this is a straightforward translation of a phrase referring to a type of medical condition, not an instruction or action).
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	You know that the shoulder is not dislocated because of only two manners: one where it displaces part of the arm below the armpit and the other where it moves part above the elbow, and such cases occur rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and not displaced backward due to the shoulder, nor dispersed inside due to nerves; and in most cases it is dislocated down towards the arm, mainly for those who have little strength because she jumps abruptly there; but for those with enough strength, she leaps and returns.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some people with percussions or fractures, and the shoulder swells from an abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It must then be verified by you as long as you are certain; and then begins the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And know that dislocations occur when it is pulled towards the arm, and you will find a clear difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and there is evident variety between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder an indentation, and touch it with your finger as if it were a hernia; and no one can make the painful shoulders return to their position.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, since it is unesce que chascunjourneau.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	:com espace.  2013 (in the early it isme ions comme le casse laire 5: in thees decait, cose.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers love the hand of the patient in high regard, then place your gloves above the wound, and lovingly apply pressure on the joint upwards at the edge; and the ministers love the hand, and extend it upwards, so as to put it above; if there comes suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we said in the past days, then it must be that the patient's pain is bathed in warm water; and they are advised to rub softly and soothe, similar to a decoction of honey and fenugreek and melilot in warm water, and they are comforted.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then they should support the patient's pain on their back, and place a piece of linen evenly over the wound, not too tight nor too rough, then put the rings on the linen, and lovingly treat the head of the shoulder. And take hold of the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another minister tints the head of the painful area, so that it does not move further downwards; this shoulder returns to its normal state now, and if you see it repositioned according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And it is that you make sure there is a person who is bigger than the painful area; and he should be placed by the side of the patient's shoulder, and stretch the linen over the painful area, and lovingly lift the linen so that the painful part hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other ministers take the patient's hand down towards their abdomen; and if the painful area is too heavy, they do not impose anything on it at all, and the dislocation returns to its normal state now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the repositioner also does it in another way: and this is to stick a long piece of wood into the ground, with the shoulder being treated similarly as with an arrow (pestle), neither too large nor too rough.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then it is placed on the painful area but with softer cloth underneath, and the painful area lies long in that manner; then it extends its hand downwards to another part, and the joint returns quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return to all these things that we have said: and take ymbreu douns esparte chaundre deffective in the voie of thees peuch.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	sse ceceux en laquelle foise (entifere.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is in it, in any way that may be, it must that you place on the shoulder a spindle of wool evenly, then set up the ignite apparatus with powdered mineral, with incense and lamb's wool all over her shoulder and back, then strap the woolen band around the ignite apparatus, and turn the leather straps to the ignite apparatus, and embrace her hand in his collar, and keep their hands moving as such.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be that he massages gently for as long as the limbs are comfortable, because they will heal faster; and then massage more after 2 to 3 weeks or so, and move them around, and if they are firm and not softened, they are healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the dislocation is strong because of moisture or for another reason it must be that you administer three punctures to him, as if he were in front of a medical practitioner skilled in cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all that and after 2 to 3 years the dislocation does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve in the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened; and you realize that the dislocation was never properly fixed.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is closer to the palm or backside, made by a push or extension of hands and administered another treatment line; and take care as long as he remains healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after recovery comes stiffness to the limb and with movements again he uses his painful hands many times until those stiffnesses have disappeared, and return them to their original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	from this dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is understood that this type of dislocation has been displaced into pockets and then back again; it has been displaced from all parts and especially in front and behind, and the dislocations are not properly repositioned because you can clearly see and feel them; they are displaced according to each case.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sore shoulder with the healthy one, so that it can be seen openly; because the dislocation is fixed, and it cannot bend his arm or touch his shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset him immediately after the abscess has opened wide, for if the abscess opens widely, it would be grievous to bring back; and possibly not all can be brought back in one go, especially when it is at the back, more so than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and probably the death of the wound.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be brought back like this, extend your hand to his hands; and let his arms be spread out according to its shape, on both sides, under and above, joining together all parts of the joint or at the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it comes back when he doubles his hand on his hand, and stretches out from the root of the palm where it has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, give it a strong extension; and let two ministers extend his arm and tie them both, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn his arm in one direction, wrap him with a long, wide cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the pain at the joint of his hand, he does not oil it in any way to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly, so that it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is back to its place, put him on a hard bed with woolen coverings, stretch his arm firmly, fasten the limb of the malady, leave it untouched for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, let it rest there, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then reapply the hard bed and bandage, and leave it for some days so that it is securely fastened, then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels gripped after the tightening of the joint, and it moves, then bathe him well and rub softly, press so that it becomes relaxed; or you place a greasy sheepskin on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then let the physician examine it or apply a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, regularly rub the joint, replace the sheepskin cover, and then apply a bath; and do this for one or three times until it is healed; if you see him, put a warm wet cloth with lint on his body and stretch the arm firmly. If so, he returns to his normal condition.
li dislocation de la main	The shoulder dislocation
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the joint in the hand has occurred and its return is light compared to other joints; it must be brought back to the place immediately when the joint is dislocated, as soon as possible so that his fingers are spread out wide. (Note: This translation appears to follow from an incomplete sentence or topic heading.)
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the restoration is when you place the malady on a table, and extend the ministers' hands, and look at him similarly so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and bind it tightly until it returns. (Note: This translation also seems to be following an incomplete sentence or topic heading.)
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	n itin.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, he places his painful back on the table, and the doctor puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, then strapping with soothing antiseptics on the wound will prevent it from repeating.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put the dislocation back to its place after any day, then the dislocated joint becomes stiff.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and you cannot deny to the patient that as long as his hands are limp, he cannot stretch anything: therefore you know that nerves or arteries have been cut; if there is no other way worth trying than with cautery near the wound, and perhaps it's not better.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are back in place, put on the strapping we have mentioned beforehand, then stretch and let it rest for a few days, then remove it and leave it as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no sign of injury, then apply warm water to the area, and rub until it becomes healthy again.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	about the dislocation of a hand joint.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	There has never been an extraction of the hand joint to any part, not once on the back of the palm or in the abdomen.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	because it is the joint, and reset the dislocation in your pockets as long as it returns, then support the head of the hand joint, and place it towards the part where it has come undone.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it rest for two days, and then put it back in place; nourish it as we have said before, loosen it day by day, make it move again, and reattach it; do this often until it is straightened.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do this if it is extracted from the palm of the hand, just like you did before, until it's healthy again; and also do this if it is extracted from another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	two dislocations of the shoulder joint.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck is dislocated and there are more than one, if there's no treatment, because the patient suffers greatly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the strappings will fall off by themselves, and he cannot hold them, and many times become loose on any limb, or two fingers or one arm.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the shoulder joint moves to four parts; that which moves backwards is called "gilbostitis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	the treatment is that you consider if the gilbostitis came from childhood; otherwise, there's no need for any remedy or healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which fell down or was hit by blows or similar things, the ancient treatises of healing say with great words, but it doesn't bring much benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have taken this according to my intention, and formed remedies in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that the gilbostitis comes from the uterus, there is no better medicine or healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also this one that comes directly to two points, and cannot be healed other than the wounds it directly affects in its own right as I have said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And the pain is so great that it extends down to his face in one level, and puts strain on his body which prevents him from bleeding out.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a firebrand at the head in ground form, and another on the shoulders, and tie a pad around the wounds of the maladies, and another on the thighs, and calves, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And he divides the bands, one to the head and the others on the shoulders among the two firebrands.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And they must be tightly fastened, as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the spine in its proper form until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this cure, take a board of two arms long, and clamp it under the part, and place the patient on the board, and then position the headboard beneath the spine, and put the support of the board against the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And place the doctor's hands on the other chief of the board, and press well until it returns to its original position; if you see it, make it turn in the hand that turns by itself.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And place two firebrands on the head of the malady with one arm long and others two at the shoulders between each pair of flames, leaving about an inch of space between them.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each firebrand place one hole, or if the hand turns it, and fix the firebrands firmly into the ground so they do not move; between each pair of flames there should be a turning firebrand, because as the ropes turn, let there be small flames with about an inch of length to make the turning happen.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the band that is among the ropes to the headboard's turning mechanism, and the other band to the shoulders' turning mechanism at the other torch; each minister turns his turning mechanism for the entire chain, and the master positions the spine equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is levelled, place a drying agent with an abundance of oil on top, and then the embers, and then a tablecloth of three feet long that covers the area of bruising and healthy part of the spine, and tie it to the band as we have said, and use the patient's grunts subtly until he is sound again.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if nothing happens at the end of healing, it must be to administer soft and soothing medicines with the tablecloth we have mentioned before; and never do I administer a piece of wood.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And if the appearance appears in the rear part of the spine of the back, and one must take care that it is dislocations; and because the bone comes out, therefore there should be no presumption that death will come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	:allit aferment of the English andrevert in the ancienjour. Iiij.illements deaf. Itinerior thek:in theire tithesu frommelet the right nowrere. Allude aye. illegure ofsoule.  iewentir. In the end.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation in such a way that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens more of the sick man's joints than the healthy ones, and it cannot double its knee cap by fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And is the leg that lies behind the incision hot, because it brings forth blood from the hip joint.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that person whose blood flows to the wound is such that this accident is contrary to these beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that person whose leg is properly performed according to completion; all this, it does not double its knee cap with pain and if they try to make him move, he cannot beforehand and retains his urine, and swells the angle, and when he goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that person whose leg is behind, it cannot expand its knee cap, double, and that leg is more tightened than the other, and the hip joint is softened, and the hips are at the edge of the flanks.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The return of this kind of dislocation is that it has been there for some time, and it takes place according to its position, and it requires no treatment; and it does not need any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that which the dislocation is fresh, and it consists of four types of dislocation, if you hasten to return the joint, and put them together again at both sides, and cause movement on the right and left side; perhaps it will come back by itself, and there needs no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary to prepare one strong minister and hold the leg firmly with two hands or with some fabric that wraps around its knee cap;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and others stretch their hands over the joint in such a way that they push their hands against its sides; and some hold the edge of the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upwards and downwards them all once, so that the sick man remains raised from the ground for one time, and then hangs again.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to these three types, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is well done.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If it is not so, then there needs to be a remedy for its appearance. When the dislocation is in its previous position, it is necessary to keep the sick person on his side with their knee bent, place the bandage under the root of the hip joint, and tie it above the hip bone, around the angle, and then the bandage is placed high towards the angle, and towards the force.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and other ministers then surround the big toe of the sick foot, and extend it to this dislocation is less severe: and this manner of dislocation is more delicate than invention.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot join them in this manner that we have said, it requires you to bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong rope under the two heels and thighs, and make the ill leg extended more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang the patient's head from a beam, and have it hanging for .ij. arms of length; then command your minister to embrace the neck of the sick person, and let another group of ministers hanging with the sick person who embraces form the neck, because now the joint has returned hastily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocations are gone away, if there is pain in them sick person's feet, as we have said in those who suffer with bumpiness, and straighten out a rope under the ill leg itself and also under the foot;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put .ij. pricks on the head and .ij. other on the feet of that sick person, then drive a pin between their necks in the form of the embrace;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And plant the wet cloths on it so that it does not harm the sick person, then extend each minister towards him and put the pin in equal position with his hand;
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. But if not, put it on the table and press it as we have said in the case of bumpiness, and alleviate the pain in the sore shoulder.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are before, it requires extending the sick leg hastily, and according to what I have said; then place your fingers on the pain in the area of the dislocation, press with one hand, and extend the other towards the groin of that person.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocations are gone away, it does not require extending the sick person's leg downwards or lifting him up from the ground, but rather that he should be as we have described in our discussion of lying on the ground after a dislocation is resolved.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and hang it from his neck as we have said before, and he must press the joint to the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	3. Est-laisse semblans. Estil estoif theoresenter theorecele it'sisillemente leuillel theque pasiletin:1307658,revel, andmeathejac:entire le4 beforeisexent. 9noun. Icelikejunction.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let it rest for three years or four, then remove it, and place the plaster on it; and if you see that they are even, strain them as before, and leave it. Three years; then remove it, and let the limb go well, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the double joint dislocation.
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The joints are dislocated according to three methods: inside and out, and behind, and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it doesn't touch its kneecap, you know that they have been dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit right, extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their knee, and put their hand on your knee.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take the joint in your palms, and pull apart your hands, then bend each of the two joints forming the dislocation, and other assistants extend their hand, so that the joint returns to its place, and it shows that the leg is moving towards the knee lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And put the plaster on it, and raise the leg to the knee, and tie the limb firmly for three or four years, then remove it; and do not work the patient until their members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not at all, with strong extension as we have said in treating hernias, until they are healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	From the double heel dislocation.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels have never been displaced completely, and inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is loose, and try in front of where it has been displaced.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The repositioning should be lightly done with the limb extended when it is loose.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely displaced, it must be made so the patient sits right, and only two other assistants by the leg, over the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then place your hand on his right foot with one of the assistants, and then again left foot two times, then lift it up well, and push gently the assistant's foot up.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this three times as we have said, pushing and lifting the assistant's foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, continue with the operation, because it returns.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return in this way, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fasten firmly a rope between their kneecaps, and cover with sheets so that it does not hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then tie the assistants' feet, and other assistants extend the assistant's foot to their hands or one of them where it is tied above the neck of the assistant.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then stretch each minister evenly, and the rope should be then between the patient's kneecaps to hold the patient while you extend it.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place equal measures of cold on the dislocation in his hands, and use other remedies to heal healthy legs quickly, so that the dislocation will soon return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, if you apply emplastrum and bandages on top, make strains with them, and tie the cloth around the leg, and warn those who are above the ankle not to move too much;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it rest for either two or three years, and if the strain improves, then remove it; otherwise, after one to three months, move the patient back home gradually over three years.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it progresses before this end, it's still not safe as it may dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when an abscess appears in the foot, it must be eased, just as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	In order to.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the doctors are dislocated (metaphorically speaking), they must still extend their services to laborious work, which is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in no particular part of its original position, it must be made to lie either on one or two legged support, or entirely resting on an iron table straightened out completely, and place your mat under the joints above those openings, then press down firmly until it regains its position.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is equalized (the dislocation), and there's no opening at all, then place the foot flat on a table with two legs, make strains with them, and let it rest for three years; then remove the support, allowing the patient to recuperate as long as he remains well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes along with the dislocation, it is treated in order to restore health; many times we see the patient's painful death.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not careful in the treatment, if it is left unused for longtime, and it happens toils.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And use at the beginning of things soothing aims to cauterize, and let the patient hold God in their hand if there is no hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then straighten the limb back to its place, so that the incision swelling subsides.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is misaligned, if you apply soothing cauterization and treat the wound as it requires, using drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, then do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And keep yourself from falling into fear, according to what I have said, for it brings you closer to your Creator's will, and for the benefit of your health and body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	This is not a direct translation related to the text provided; however, if we were to relate this request to the medical treatise context:
